UK political system vulnerable to anti-democratic meddling via social media and ‘possibly illicit’ campaign funding, report says   Russia’s attempts to influence British democracy and the potential vulnerability of parts of the UK political system to anti-democratic meddling during the EU referendum have been detailed in a report prepared by the US Senate. The report by Democrats on the Senate foreign relations committee, titled Putin’s asymmetric assault on democracy in Russia and Europe: implications for US national security, pinpoints the way in which UK campaign finance laws do not require disclosure of political donations if they are from “the beneficial owners of non-British companies that are incorporated in the EU and carry out business in the UK”. This opacity, the report suggests, “may have enabled Russian-related money to be directed with insufficient scrutiny to various UK political actors”. “Investigative journalists have also raised questions about the sources of sudden and possibly illicit wealth that may have been directed to support the Brexit ‘Leave’ campaign.” The UK Electoral Commission has already launched an investigation into the issue. The senators point out that Ukip and its then-leader, Nigel Farage, did not just fan anti-EU sentiment but also “criticised European sanctions on Russia, and provided flattering assessments of Russian President Putin”. The report adds that although officially the Russian government asserted its neutrality on Brexit, its English-language media outlets RT and Sputnik covered the referendum campaign extensively and offered ‘’systematically one-sided coverage’’.  The senators also challenge the adequacy of the investigations by Facebook and Twitter into the allegations of widespread social media interference by the Russians during the referendum. They reference University of Edinburgh research showing more than 400 Russian-run Twitter accounts that had been active in the US election had also been actively posting about Brexit. In addition, the senators noted that research conducted by a joint team of experts from the University of California at Berkeley and Swansea University reportedly identified 150,000 Twitter accounts with various Russian ties that disseminated messages about Brexit. The report also points to the vast flow of Russian money into the UK, including the London property market. It records how the Metropolitan police noted that a total value of £180m in properties in the UK had been put under investigation as possibly purchased with corrupt proceeds by secretive offshore companies. Strictly defined, a Twitter bot is any automated account on the social network. That can be something as simple as automatically tweeting links to news articles – most of the Guardian's social media accounts are technically Twitter bots, for instance – to complex interactions like automatically generating Emoji-based art or automatically replying to climate change deniers with scientific evidence. But, as with "troll" and "fake news", the strict definition has been forgotten as the term has become one of political conflict. The core of the debate is the accusation that a number of political tweets were sent by "Russian bots", with the intention of subverting political debate, or simply creating chaos generally. Based on what we know about Russian information warfare, the Twitter accounts run by the country's "troll army", based in a nondescript office building in St Petersburg, are unlikely to be automated at all. Instead, accounts like @SouthLoneStar, which pretended to be a Texan right-winger, were probably run by individuals paid 45-65,000 rubles a month to sow discord in Western politics. In other ways, they resembled bots – hence the confusion. They rarely tweeted about themselves, sent far more posts than a typical user, and were single-minded in what they shared. People behaving like bots pretending to be people: this is the nature of modern propaganda. Overall the report breaks little new ground in terms of fresh evidence but says the picture remains incomplete. “The allegations that have emerged of Russian interference prior to the Brexit referendum are all the more stunning given the innate resilience within British society to the Kremlin’s anti-democratic agenda,” the senators wrote. The report, which chronicles Russian disinformation efforts in 19 countries, calls on Donald Trump to assert leadership on Russian meddling in the 2016 presidential election, saying: “Never before in American history has so clear a threat to national security been so clearly ignored by a US president.” 
Remain supporter Ángel Gurría says UK needs to accept vote but keep close links with EU   Ángel Gurría, the head of one of the west’s leading thinktanks and one of the most prominent supporters of remain during the EU referendum campaign, has said it is time to move on and ensure that Brexit is a success. “We have no choice,” the secretary general of the Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development said in an interview with the Guardian at the World Economic Forum in Davos. “We have to take action and make it as smooth as possible.” Gurría said Britain would retain close links with the EU despite the vote to leave in June 2016. “There is a nearness and a closeness, 40 years of living as part of the same family. That doesn’t disappear with the stroke of a pen or because of a referendum.” The OECD secretary general said his strong support for the UK to remain in the EU had been to no avail. But he said Britain needed to retain close links with the other 27 EU member states to minimise disruption. “I was strongly against Brexit. I speechified against Brexit. I said a vote to leave would be a Brexit tax. I couldn’t think of anything stronger than that. I have family who are British citizens and who want to be citizens of the world and citizens of the EU,” he said. “But we didn’t win. It was decided upon, voted on, confirmed by parliament. What we have to do now is make Brexit as least costly and as least disruptive as possible.” Gurría said the UK’s history and geography meant it would always be an important trading partner of the EU and played down suggestions that Brexit would affect London’s position as one of the world’s three big financial centres. “The City of London is always going to be there and will continue to be important,” he said. Last year, the Paris-based thinktank fuelled speculation that it wanted a second EU referendum when it said it would upwardly revise its gloomy economic forecasts for the UK if the Brexit vote was overturned. But Gurría said the decision had been taken. “Let’s turn it around. Let’s take action to make it work. Let’s move on,” he said. The OECD secretary general said the backdrop to the Brexit process was a global economy that was improving but yet to return to the growth levels seen before the financial crisis of a decade ago. “We are not having a boom, we are having a recovery,” he said. “It has taken 10 years and we are still not back to where we were before. That should be sobering.” Gurría said reforms to improve education and skills, and action to boost research and development, were important to make the global upswing sustainable. But he added that an OECD assessment showed that only half the growth-boosting measures promised by leading developed and developing countries had actually been delivered. “There seems to be some kind of reform fatigue,” he said. He added that governments were putting off reforms because they were deemed less urgent now that their economies had started to grow again. “That will make the next crisis or the next bump in the road come closer,” he said. Before Donald Trump’s expected appearance in Davos on Friday, Gurría said he was hopeful that the US president would “embrace multiateralism”. Trump has threatened to pull out of the 2015 Paris climate change agreement and has withdrawn the US from the UN compact on migration and refugees, but the head of the OECD said it was important that action taken by America dovetailed with international efforts. Gurría said these were issues that couldn’t be dealt with individually even by a country as big as the US. “Doing it together works better,” he said. “Collective action is greater than the sum of the individual parts that go into it and the benefits to all will be greater than the effort that any one country can undertake.”
Guardian/ICM survey finds rising interest in vote on final deal as concerns mount over EU talks   Voters support the idea of holding a second EU referendum by a 16-point margin, according to one of the largest nationwide opinion polls since the Brexit vote. The ICM survey, conducted as part of a Guardian reporting project, found 47% of people would favour having a final say on Brexit once the terms of the UK’s departure are known, while 34% oppose reopening the question. Excluding the roughly one-fifth who do not have a view gives a lead of 58% to 42% for a second referendum, showing rising interest in the idea as concern grows over the direction of recent negotiations.  The increased backing has come from both sides of the debate, with one-quarter of leave voters in favour of having another referendum on the final deal. Other key findings include: The consequences of revisiting the vote are hard to predict, with the country still split largely in two, and signs of both camps hardening their positions. The poll was underpinned by Guardian journalists reporting from around the country, where they found support for leave hardening in Mansfield, Labour supporters arguing for a second referendum in Bristol, older voters in Torbay who continue to wholeheartedly back Brexit, and students in Leeds angry and concerned that it is going ahead. Overall, the ICM poll, carried out in mid-January, confirms a small but persistent shift in recent months towards remain, with 51% of those expressing a view saying they were now in favour of staying in the EU. But this would be a tighter margin than the 52% leave result of the June 2016 referendum, suggesting a clearer mandate for reversing the decision would only come if growing numbers of leavers reacted negatively to the conclusion of negotiations with the EU. Pollsters have struggled in recent years to predict correct outcomes, although the 5,075 people polled is a representative sample five times bigger than many similar surveys. Alex Turk, a senior research executive at ICM Unlimited, said: “On the results of this poll of 5,000, the result of a second EU referendum would be far from a foregone conclusion.” To the extent that there is a shift towards remain, it is largely due to voters who did not, or could not, participate in the referendum saying they would be more likely to do so next time. Of those who voted, 90% said they would stick to their previous choice, and the numbers of people switching sides largely cancel each other out. But it is the growing numbers of people in both camps who favour revisiting the question that is likely to have the biggest short-term political impact. Previously, support for a second referendum had been limited. A smaller Guardian/ICM poll in December found 45% of voters wanted the UK to leave the EU regardless of the outcome of negotiations, with 32% wanting a second referendum and 10% favouring a parliamentary vote. What would happen if parliament were to reject the Brexit deal remains unclear, but many pro-EU campaigners increasingly argue that a vote could be phrased in such a way as to give Britons a chance to change their minds about the overall departure from the EU if they did not like the terms on offer. Representatives from several leading pro-EU groups met in London recently to consider ways of working more closely on overturning Brexit, rather than merely campaigning for a less extreme version, a tactic some senior business leaders are privately known to favour. Support for asking the question is also growing in unlikely quarters, as the weakness of the government’s mandate and negotiating stance becomes clearer. Speaking earlier this month, the ex-Ukip leader Nigel Farage said: “Maybe, just maybe, I’m reaching the point of thinking that we should have a second referendum on EU membership.” On Wednesday, the Conservative MP Jacob Rees-Mogg criticised the Brexit secretary, David Davis, for proposing a two-year transition that would leave Britain as a “vassal state” and pointed out that it would soon have less influence. Donald Tusk, the European council president, has said the EU would be open to a British rethink, while a group of former German business leaders has called on Brussels negotiators to offer a compromise deal on immigration that would help persuade the UK to reverse Brexit. The ICM poll found 32% thought Brexit would have a positive impact on the UK economy, compared with a 38% response when the same question was asked last February.
Labour leader disappoints pro-EU MPs in address to parliamentary party before launching attack on ‘struggling’ Tory government   Jeremy Corbyn has insisted the UK cannot be a member of the single market after Brexit, disappointing some of his pro-European Union MPs. The Labour leader told colleagues that it was not possible to stay in the single market, as he set out his Brexit policy to the parliamentary party on Monday night. Some within Labour have been increasing calls for Corbyn to listen to the party’s pro-EU membership and commit to staying in the trading bloc. But Corbyn stressed that this was not an option, as he addressed the reasons why he would not attend a single market summit convened by the Scottish National party’s Westminster leader Ian Blackford. A senior Labour source said: “The single market is not a membership club that can be joined so we seek through negotiation to retain the benefits of the single market. “As he said in his letter back to Ian Blackford, the summit rests on the falsehood that the single market is a membership organisation which you can join, which it is not. Our approach for a jobs-first Brexit, which involves retaining the benefits of the single market, is through negotiation with the EU.” His comments prompted frustration from some pro-EU MPs in the meeting, who believed that Corbyn had been persuaded to keep the door open to staying in the single market for longer than the transitional period after Brexit. One Labour MP said: “The key thing is about keeping all the options on the table when it comes to the single market and customs union. It is clear from recent polling that an overwhelming majority of Labour members, supporters and voters believe this.” Corbyn explained to his MPs and peers that Labour would now be embarking on a fresh push to prepare for government. His shadow ministers will have meetings to discuss policy and strategy over the next week and are not expected to be subjected to a reshuffle.  “This weak and struggling government is causing untold damage – and we need to replace it as soon as is possible,” he told the parliamentary party. “So, as I said in my new year message, we are staking out the new centre ground, as a government in waiting.” He signalled Labour’s intention to keep up the pressure on the government on domestic policy issues, while branding May’s reshuffle as “a pointless and lacklustre PR exercise”. “We’re not only seeing growing problems across the NHS; the cost of travel is going up; our social security system is being dismantled; our housing crisis has been cruelly exposed by the terrible Grenfell fire, and by the Conservatives in Windsor who want to sweep rough sleepers from the streets and the government’s threat to jobs and living standards from its chaotic Brexit negotiations,” he said.
Shahmir Sanni, a volunteer for Vote Leave, the official pro-Brexit EU referendum campaign, explains how a data company linked to Cambridge Analytica played a crucial role in the result, and voices his concerns that electoral spending rules were manipulated… and evidence apparently destroyed • Brexit insider claims Vote Leave team may have breached spending limits • The ties that bound Leave campaign data firm AIQ to controversial Cambridge Analytica by  Carole Cadwalladr. Portrait by  Antonio Olmos  When I first met Shahmir Sanni last August, he was nervy, anxious, uncertain. “I’ve just started piecing it together,” he said, in what was our first off-the-record conversation. “All this stuff I didn’t realise at the time.” Stuff that a series of investigations and news articles had forced him to start thinking about. “Was I just really naive?” he asked. Then later: “Do you think they just used me?” It’s been a painful question for Sanni, one that he’s struggled with over a period of months. Now, though, he thinks that, yes, he was used; that he and his friend, Darren Grimes, were taken advantage of by people they respected and trusted, and that the consequences of it are profound, far reaching, and go well beyond his own personal feelings of hurt and betrayal. In early 2016, Sanni was a 22-year-old recent graduate, volunteering with Vote Leave, the official campaign to leave the European Union led by Boris Johnson and Michael Gove. It was one of his first pieces of work experience after graduating from the University of East Anglia with a degree in economics, and for someone who describes himself as a “natural Eurosceptic” it was a plum role. “It was like a startup. Everyone was throwing ideas around and saying different things. You’re given a lot of creative freedom.” He was still living at home in Solihull, but was travelling in by train, a few days each week, to work in Vote Leave’s headquarters at Millbank Tower in London, overlooking the Thames. Vote Leave’s senior directors were quick to realise how useful he would be for the campaign. “A huge part of campaigns is to make sure you diversify,” says Sanni. “And we discussed how crucial it was that Vote Leave didn’t appear racist.” So, it was: “Here’s the brown guy”? “Exactly,” he says. It was a role he was happy to play, though, helping with their black and ethnic minority outreach efforts. “At university all my friends were ‘Remain, Remain, Remain’, but when I started doing research into it, I realised I’m a nerdy Eurosceptic. And even after all this, I would still vote Leave.” “All this” is why Sanni is talking today. Because it’s what happened next that’s the issue – a sequence of events that began in March 2016, when one of Vote Leave’s senior directors, Stephen Parkinson, who is now Theresa May’s political secretary, asked Sanni if he would be interested in helping with one of Vote Leave’s official youth groups, BeLeave. “BeLeave was very progressive; it was aimed at young, liberal Leavers. They were talking about African farmers being discriminated against… it totally aligned with my values.” BeLeave had been set up and was being run from within Vote Leave’s HQ by another volunteer, 23-year-old fashion student Darren Grimes, whose main role was creating ads and messaging to share on social media. “His content was just really, really good. They were just cool, simple graphics that people would share. His creative side shone through. Everyone recognised that.” Sanni continued to campaign for Vote Leave, but he was also now helping BeLeave. Then about a month before the referendum, “Cleo tells us someone, a sponsor, wants to give money to BeLeave”. This was Cleo Watson, another senior director at Vote Leave – its head of outreach. Now, like Parkinson, Watson works at No 10 Downing Street, as political adviser to Theresa May. When Watson said a donor had expressed interest in giving money to BeLeave so it could expand its work, Sanni and Grimes wrote a proposal. They could treble the impact of their Facebook content, they reckoned, if they could get a few thousand pounds to spend on ads. “We were like: ‘If we had £10,000, this is what we could do: we could have X number of paid adverts and reach so many people.’” Dominic Cummings Campaign director of Vote Leave and former special adviser to Michael Gove, the 46-year-old from Durham has been described as an “optimistic Eurosceptic” by the Economist. Cummings is regarded as the leading strategist of the campaign. He is credited with creating the memorable official slogan of Vote Leave: “take back control”.  Matthew Elliott (pictured) Chief executive of Vote Leave, the 40-year-old political strategist from Leeds has been described by the BBC as “one of the most effective lobbyists at Westminster”. Elliott is a former chief executive of Big Brother Watch, Business for Britain and the TaxPayers’ Alliance. He is currently editor-at-large of BrexitCentral. Stephen Parkinson The national organiser of the ground operation for Vote Leave, Parkinson is from North Shields  and was a special adviser to Theresa May when she was home secretary. Following the EU referendum victory he rejoined her as a special adviser based in Downing Street. His current official title is political secretary to the prime minister.  Victoria Woodcock  Vote Leave’s operations director. Credited by Cummings with winning the referendum: he described her as “the most indispensable person in the campaign – if she’d gone under a bus, Remain would have won.” Vote Leave’s powerful ‘Voter Intention Collection System’ (Vics) software was named after her.  Henry de Zoete  Old Etonian digital director of Vote Leave and another senior figure from the Michael Gove camp: Zoete, 36, worked for four years as right-hand man to Gove when he was education secretary.  Cleo Watson Prominent member of Vote Leave and now a political adviser at 10 Downing Street. Prompted uproar during the referendum when a leaked email revealed her telling clinicians that her group needed doctors and nurses to warn that Britain’s health service was being damaged by the EU.     Darren Grimes Former fashion design student, 25, who ran BeLeave – the campaign group given £625,000 by Vote Leave during the final stages of the referendum. The cash was paid directly to data company AggregateIQ. The donation is currently being investigated  by the Electoral Commission. Grimes is now the deputy editor of the BrexitCentral website.  Boris Johnson  A figurehead of Vote Leave and member of the campaign committee that met weekly during the referendum to set its campaign strategy. The 53-year-old Old Etonian is currently foreign secretary. Michael Gove  Co-convener of Vote Leave’s campaign committee, the 50-year-old  is currently environment secretary.  Previously he has served as education secretary and justice secretary. Watson told them they needed to speak to Vote Leave’s internal lawyer and head of compliance. “And he said the only way to get money was to set [BeLeave] up as a separate organisation. So, we were like: ‘OK, cool. How do we do that?’ And so he wrote up the constitution for us. And Darren put his own name on it. Because that’s what he was told to do.” The lawyer helped Sanni and Grimes to draw up the documents, which they signed on 18 May, and he told them to open a bank account. But no donor ever materialised. Later, in the crucial final fortnight before the referendum, the talk in the Vote Leave office was about how the campaign was both running out of money and about to hit its spending limit of £7m. And then, 10 days before the referendum, Vote Leave learned that they had received a donation of £1m. Because of their spending limits, they suggested this could be given as a donation to BeLeave. Not the few thousand pounds they had asked for, though. The proposed sum was initially £400,000 but ended up close to £700,000. What was your reaction? “We were ecstatic. It was amazing. Can you imagine… you’re 22 and you’re given nearly a million pounds? I think I added that to my LinkedIn profile that same day.” Today, though, for Sanni, that campaign, the money, the creative work, and everything associated with it is tainted. What he has spent months coming to terms with is that this donation may not have had anything to do with BeLeave’s creativity and flair. “Vote Leave didn’t really give us that money,” he says. “They just pretended to. We had no control over it. We were 22-year-old students. You’re not going to just give nearly a million pounds to a pair of students and let them do whatever.” To Sanni’s mind, what this means is: “They cheated.” The question is whether this was a strategy to get around the strict electoral spending limits enforced by law. If election campaigns coordinate, they have to declare their spending together. Spending limits are the bedrock of our parliamentary democracy: our electoral laws control the amount of money that can be spent in elections – which for the official designated campaign group is £7m. But a perfectly legal loophole exists: separate campaigns can spend up to £700,000 in excess of that. Just as long as they don’t co-ordinate – or, in the Electoral Commission’s words, “work together”. So was BeLeave a separate campaign? Vote Leave insist it was and the Electoral Commission agreed back in April 2017. But Sanni – and he has a wealth of documents – now thinks it wasn’t. He believes BeLeave “worked together” with Vote Leave. “It’s a lie. The whole thing. It was never separate.” And he has a whole dossier of emails, text messages and other files. What’s more: “They told us to set up the bank account, but no money ever went into it. I was the treasurer and secretary of BeLeave and I never saw the money. I had no control over it. It was Vote Leave who decided everything.” The money went straight to Vote Leave’s Canadian data analytics firm – AggregateIQ (AIQ). It’s an extraordinary revelation. The Observer has been one of a number of publications and campaign groups that have picked away at the story behind this donation. Because one thing is clear: something smelled bad. It’s been the subject of two Electoral Commission investigations, an inquiry by the Information Commissioner’s Office, numerous Freedom of Information requests, multiple articles and a judicial review. The latest investigation is still live. And nobody has yet been able to answer the question posed in the very first article by BuzzFeed on 2 August 2016: “Why did Vote Leave donate £625,000 to a 23-year-old fashion student during the referendum?” Until now. Because Sanni knows exactly why. “We were two broke college students. Darren’s working-class as well. And it’s his name all over this. He’s the one being investigated. It’s his name on the form. And he just did what Vote Leave told him.” 17 days after an investigation opened, Vote Leave's COO deleted herself and two others from over 100 files Sanni is quite profoundly anti-Europe. He doesn’t believe in what he calls EU “passport discrimination”. And having moved here from Pakistan, he loves this country with the passion that, he says, maybe only an immigrant can feel. “Britain saved my family,” he says. “I voted Leave. And if there was a second referendum, I would vote Leave again. But I now know my vote was based on cheating. And that’s what I cannot stand.” To say it’s a brave decision to come forward is a huge understatement. Sanni is still only 24. The CEO of Vote Leave, Matthew Elliott, is the co-founder of the TaxPayers’ Alliance, where Sanni works as digital campaign manager. And a lot of his friends are still in that same pro-Brexit world, including Darren Grimes, who now works for the website BrexitCentral where Matthew Elliott is editor at large. Sanni lives in BrexitLand. His career has been built on Brexit. And his decision to come forward has been far from straightforward. Back in August, we discussed him going on the record anonymously, but even that felt too risky. He was worried about his mother – a teacher who came to Britain as a single mother from Pakistan less than a decade ago – and his two sisters. But it’s also part of what has prompted his decision. “I’m from Pakistan. And for someone that came here seeking a new life, a better life, one where my mum and my sisters could live freely, in a country where my decision as a voter actually matters and is truthful… this is a huge deal.” The first inkling that something wasn’t right came when journalists from BuzzFeed and Private Eye got sight of BeLeave’s audit to the Electoral Commission and found what BuzzFeed noted was “a highly unusual transfer of funds”. Namely that Darren Grimes was recorded as having received a total of £675,315 in four donations spread over eight days shortly before polling day – on 13, 16, 20 and 21 June. Sanni shrugged it off. “I just thought: ‘Oh, this is how politics is. It’s remoaners trying to smear us and our hard work.’” But Grimes was less sanguine. Sanni still has his Facebook messages, which show his confusion and panic. “I’ve had three journalists this morning,” one says. “I don’t know if I should go back to GP and be like I’m dying or just fight through it.” (A reference, Sanni says, to the state of his health.) Grimes then forwarded an email he’d received from a Vote Leave director: “So as discussed we think you should refuse to speak to hacks about it and just email them something like this: ‘We received donations in a standard legal way and have reported them according to the rules.’” In the BuzzFeed article, Grimes says: “We received donations in a standard legal way and have reported them according to the rules.” What Sanni believes, and says is reflected in the multiple pages of evidence that he has gathered, is that Vote Leave directed BeLeave’s actions before it became a separate campaign, after it became a separate campaign, and throughout the referendum. What’s also clear, in the pages of messages from Grimes, is how the donation – which has put him front and centre of the media coverage – has affected him. His messages to Sanni make distressing reading. As a teenager, Grimes was bullied. He grew up in a working-class community in County Durham, and Sanni describes him as sensitive and vulnerable to criticism. When the letter arrived from the Electoral Commission, announcing it needed to make an “assessment”, he really started to panic. “He rang me up and told me to delete my emails. I didn’t understand it. I said: ‘We’ve done nothing wrong. Don’t worry about it.’ But he was panicking. So I just did it.” Sanni still had no inkling that there was anything seriously amiss. “We were advised every step of the way by Vote Leave’s lawyers. They literally told us what to do and where to sign. I couldn’t understand how we had done anything wrong.” And then he found the drive: a shared Google drive that Vote Leave had set up and that has every appearance of being a smoking gun. It’s here that Grimes and Sanni shared content with key Vote Leave directors, including campaign director Dominic Cummings, and Vote Leave’s data analytics firm, AIQ. “I looked at it and I thought ‘Oh, my God.’ That’s when I realised things were serious. I was, ‘OK, this is really fucked up.’” What Sanni realised was that on 17 March 2017, someone using an administrator’s account in the name of Victoria Woodcock, the chief operating officer of Vote Leave, went through the drive and deleted Woodcock, Cummings and Vote Leave’s digital director, Henry de Zoete, from more than 100 files. However the system logged a record of this activity. This was 17 days after the Electoral Commission had written to Vote Leave and Darren Grimes, telling them that it was opening an investigation into the donation. And 13 days after the Observer had announced the Information Commissioner’s Office was launching an inquiry into the use of data in the referendum. Woodcock told the Observer that any suggestion that she was involved in: “knowingly and deliberately” deleting evidence “which would be relevant to an investigation” was “untrue and completely unsupported by the evidence.” Woodcock added in June 2018, three months after she was originally contacted for comment, that she had nothing to do with the deletions. She explained that the administrator account which made the deletions bore her name because she had originally set up the shared drive. She clarified, however, that she had handed over control of the account to Vote Leave on 17 March 2017, and lost access to the drive, before the deletions took place. Vote Leave said in a statement to the electoral commission in April 2018 that it restricted access to the documents as part of a routine data protection exercise. To Sanni it was obvious that something was seriously amiss – that this was evidence that had been deleted. Someone had painstakingly gone through the files one by one, and removed these names from them. Not one or two files, but 140 of them. On a blog post published on Friday, Cummings says this is “factually wrong and libellous”. Vote Leave say staff acted “ethically, responsibly and legally in deleting any data”. “What did you do when you saw that on the drive?” I ask Sanni. “I told Chris,” he says. I’ve spent countless hours this year talking to Christopher Wylie, and it was through him that I first heard about Shahmir Sanni’s role in the EU referendum. Wylie is the whistleblower whose revelations in the Observer last weekend about Cambridge Analytica and Facebook precipitated such an astonishing global fallout. Cambridge Analytica’s CEO, Alexander Nix, has been suspended, while at one stage Facebook saw around $60bn wiped off its share price. On Wednesday, Mark Zuckerberg apologised. Christopher Wylie is not just at the heart of the Cambridge Analytica-Facebook scandal. He’s at the heart of Brexit too. It was Wylie who introduced both Sanni and Grimes to Vote Leave. Politics is a small world, and Wylie’s work with the Lib Dems in the coalition government had brought him into contact with both Lib Dems and Tories. Grimes and Sanni were both friends of Wylie, and it was he who introduced them to Stephen Parkinson of Vote Leave. In a statement released this week, Stephen Parkinson said: “I was not introduced to Shahmir Sanni or Darren Grimes by Chris Wylie as he is claiming, but by a mutual friend from university.” It is Wylie’s role elsewhere that is pivotal. Because he didn’t just play a founding role in setting up Cambridge Analytica: he also helped in the setting up of AIQ, the Canadian data services and “digital advertising” firm to which Vote Leave allocated 40% of its £6.8m spend. In February last year, I wrote my first report about Cambridge Analytica, interrogating what work it had done for Nigel Farage’s Leave.EU campaign. It kicked off two investigations into Cambridge Analytica’s role in Brexit: one by the Electoral Commission into its work for Leave.EU; the other by the ICO into how it used data. Since then, both organisations have denied that Cambridge Analytica did any paid or unpaid work for Leave.EU. However, on Friday, a former director of the data firm, Brittany Kaiser, said she was told to deny any work had been done. “In my opinion, I was lying,” she said. ”I felt like we should say ‘this is exactly what we did’.” This is consistent with what I have been reporting for more than a year. In March, after the first article was published, I got a tip-off. Vote Leave – the official leave campaign group in the referendum – was entirely separate from Leave.EU, but the data analytics firm Vote Leave used, AIQ, was linked to SCL Elections, the parent company that set up Cambridge Analytica with Robert Mercer’s funds. AIQ was until last year listed on its website as “SCL Canada”. It was my attempt to prove this, to figure out the link, that first led me to Wylie. “If you want to understand where Canada fits into this,” an ex-employee of Cambridge Analytica told me, “you need to find Christopher Wylie.” So I did. Wylie was the key to understanding how Cambridge Analytica had harvested upwards of 50m Facebook profiles. And he was the key to understanding the link between Cambridge Analytica and AIQ. “I helped set up AIQ in 2013,” he told me in our first conversation. “They’re my friends. We needed someone to build Cambridge Analytica’s technology platform and manage their databases, and I asked my friend Jeff.” Jeff Silvester was Wylie’s first employer, a man he had known since he was 16 and who went on to co-found AIQ. Last May, Wylie showed me a document that proved the link: an intellectual property agreement that showed SCL Elections owned AIQ’s IP “in perpetuity”. This document shows the link between Cambridge Analytica and AIQ. Between Robert Mercer, Steve Bannon and Brexit. What’s more, says Wylie, AIQ deployed the algorithms that Cambridge Analytica built. “AIQ managed Ripon, Cambridge Analytica’s platform, and built a lot of the tech to connect the algorithms to social and online advertising networks.” In response to our questions, AggregateIQ said: “AggregateIQ has always been 100 per cent Canadian owned and operated. AggregateIQ never worked or even communicated in anyway with Cambridge Analytica, or any other parties related to Cambridge Analytica, with respect to the Brexit campaign.” In 2015 and 2016, almost all of AIQ’s work came via Cambridge Analytica. They worked closely with Cambridge Analytica’s vice-president, Steve Bannon, on multiple political campaigns in the US. “Bannon was always interested in Brexit,” says Wylie. “He saw Britain as a cultural leader. And where Britain led, America would follow.” In total, £3.9m of leave campaign funds were spent with AIQ. Four different groups used the firm, even though all these campaigns were supposedly separate and could only “work together” if they shared their spending limits. Vote Leave spent £2,697,000. There was the £675,000 via BeLeave. A sum of £100,000 that Vote Leave donated to Veterans for Britain, which Veterans for Britain then paid to AIQ. AIQ also received £32,750 from the Democratic Unionist party. Whichever way one looks at it, AIQ would seem to be fundamental to the data-driven targeting of “persuadables” in the final days of the campaign. These four campaign groups mysteriously and independently found the same tiny data analytics firm, located in a sleepy town on an island off the west coast of Canada, 5,000 miles away. In April 2017, Dominic Cummings told me by email that Vote Leave had found the firm “on the internet”. Darren Grimes told the Electoral Commission the same thing. The only problem? Online archives show that AIQ’s website didn’t show up in Google searches until after the referendum. “I looked at the time,” says Sanni. “I was, like, ‘Who is AIQ?’ And there was nothing. No website. Nothing.” It’s Cummings who is widely acknowledged to be the mastermind of Vote Leave. A close friend of Michael Gove, he had worked as his special adviser when Gove was minister of education, alongside another senior Vote Leave director, its head of digital, Henry de Zoete. Nobody is in any doubt about Cummings’s brilliance: he’s advertised it widely, and written thousands of words about his strategy on his blog – about how he spent 98% of his budget online; how Vote Leave’s ads received nearly a billion impressions; and how, in the end, it came down to just 600,000 people, or just over 1% of registered votes. “A small enough margin,” he notes, that “a few specific events and decisions” made all the difference. He’s also been very specific about the pivotal role played by AIQ. The firm’s website featured a quote from Cummings about Brexit: “We couldn’t have done it without them.” This was removed from the site this week. AIQ told the Observer that “the services it provided to Vote Leave were in accordance with instructions given by Vote Leave”, and “the services provided to BeLeave were in accordance given by BeLeave”. The final weeks of the Brexit campaign were the most crucial. On his blog, Cummings says they code-named the period “Waterloo” and ramped up its spending, bombarding the small sliver of people it had identified as “persuadable” with every kind of ad. And it worked. Cummings’s campaign was a triumph. It had overcome all the odds. There’s no doubt that he won the war of the internet. But the question about this donation, the £675,000 that went to Darren Grimes (to him personally because BeLeave was not a limited company), the four campaigns that all used AIQ, and AIQ’s links to Cambridge Analytica… all this has dogged the result for 18 months now. Last autumn, Cummings took himself off Twitter. A freedom of information effort by Peter Geoghegan and Adam Ramsay of Open Democracy became the basis for a judicial review by the Good Law Project’s Jolyon Maugham QC, and in November, in what was front-page news, the Electoral Commission reopened its investigation into Darren Grimes and the donation. It had “reasonable grounds”, it said, “to suspect an offence may have been committed.” Cummings masterminded Vote Leave’s strategy. And CEO Matthew Elliott signed it all off. But neither has been named by the Electoral Commission or the Information Commissioner’s Office in any of the multiple subsequent investigations. As Sanni points out, “It’s Darren’s name all over everything. He’s the one in the frame.” And he’s the one, according to Sanni, who has borne the brunt of the stress and anxiety that’s followed. This is the heart of the story, and it’s what has ultimately prompted Shahmir Sanni to go on the record. “Darren is totally loyal,” he says. “And they knew that.” And it was witnessing the toll the investigation was taking on Grimes that finally made Sanni realise the seriousness of the charges. “It’s the impact on Darren’s health that made me go: ‘Something’s fucked up. Something’s wrong.’” In evidence that Sanni has submitted to the Electoral Commission, he includes Facebook messages that Grimes sent him at the time senior Vote Leave staff were trying to arrange the donation; text messages that make poignant reading in the light of what happened next.” Grimes: “I was a bit worried about things going wrong tbh […] Especially with the prying eyes because of the expenses scandal.” Sanni: “What are you worried about?” Grimes: “Managing accounts/handling that sum of money and making sure everything is properly accounted for I guess. I have a lot to manage pretty much alone because people are flakey [sic]. And the last thing I need is to end up fucking up. Haha.” Sanni: “I don’t think you’ve got anything to worry about honestlyyt [sic]. And you’re worried because you care – which is good thing… And the fact that people are wiling to donate to BeLeave instead of Vote Leave is something you should be very, very proud of.” What’s more, in an email sent on 16 May to Vote Leave’s lawyer, Cleo Watson wrote: “… Darren and the rest of the group (all between 18 & 22) don’t feel comfortable handling the money side of things, having no experience beyond their student loans.” It’s a stunning acknowledgment, one which raises more questions. This was Vote Leave’s senior director and Vote Leave’s head of compliance acknowledging that this was a group of young people without the experience or wherewithal to handle such a large sum of money. Watson told the Observer: “I absolutely deny the claims being levelled against me.” She said she was supportive as a friend but did not have “any kind of control” over them. There’s a heartbreaking contrast in the documents that Sanni has – between the cynicism that informed the funding scheme and the idealism that underpinned BeLeave’s messages and beliefs (“BeLeave is a movement of young people working to build a bright future for Britain outside the European Union,” read the funding proposal document they submitted). And Grimes’s fear that somehow he would mess up and jeopardise the cause is unmistakable: that it was too much responsibility; that he didn’t feel up to it. Sanni repeatedly tells him, “you should be proud”, and Grimes replies: “I guess it is just worrying soemthing [sic] is gonna fuck up and it’ll be me having to pay thousands back and end up homeless.” We sent Darren Grimes a summary of the evidence we had found. He said any allegations he had done anything wrong were “damaging” and “untrue”. What has amazed me through all this is Sanni. When I met him in August, I didn’t think he’d come forward. I thought there was an outside chance he might leak me emails or documents, but I couldn’t see him going on record. He’s a Leaver: these are his friends and colleagues, they are people he looked up to. “Everyone associated with the campaign knew who Darren was,” he says. “Everybody congratulated us and knew what role we’d played. Michael Gove knew exactly how important we’d been. He’s a close friend of Dom Cummings. Of course he knew. Boris Johnson knew. Everybody knew.” And part of me worried about what would happen if he did go on the record. I worried that Christopher Wylie’s decision to come forward last week might over-influence Sanni. That he’d expose himself to risks he hadn’t properly thought through. That at just 24, he couldn’t really understand the possible consequences. But what I’ve learned about Sanni in the past few months is how tough-minded he is. Coming to terms with the idea that he had been gulled and compromised by the people he respected, for the cause that he loved, has been painful and difficult. It was a process of months. But since he decided to come forward, he’s been determined to do what he has no doubt is the right thing. His messages reveal how protective and supportive he’s been of Darren Grimes. They’re at the heart of his decision. But he has a sense of higher purpose too. “I think I respect British laws more than most British people do,” he says. “I feel I respect this country and love this country more than some people who have been born and bred here. Because I know and I’ve seen… the safety that it’s brought me and my family, my sisters and my mother as a woman, as women that have potential and are now living their best lives.” Sanni doesn’t go into detail about what they went through in Pakistan, but at one point he tells me that he has “had a lot of trauma in my life”. Nobody is making him come forward. And when he talks about his mother and sisters and the freedom they now enjoy, the hairs rise on the back of my neck. And then he tells me about queueing. It starts as a riff, but then it becomes a speech. A mission statement. “This is the one country where no matter what is happening, people will stand in a line. People here, there is a core ethos of what it means to be British: to do it right. To wait your turn. To never cheat or lie your way to get to the front. It’s what it means to be British.” Sanni would still vote Leave. He just wants to do it properly. “We don’t cheat,” he says. “We’re British.” What will you do on Monday, I ask him. He still works for the TaxPayers’ Alliance, co-founded by Matthew Elliott, Vote Leave’s CEO. He has no other form of income. He shrugs. “Go to work, I suppose. Wait and see what happens.” Like us all. • 13 July 2018: After we received notification from Victoria Woodcock, we clarified this article to make clear what Ms Woodcock had told us, namely that although her name appeared as the administrator for a shared Google drive, her permissions had been removed and she was not the individual responsible for the removal of permissions for herself and others from the shared Google drive. We accept that these removals were made by someone else, using an account bearing Ms Woodcock’s name. We accept that Ms Woodcock did not try to destroy evidence and that allegations of trying to thwart official investigations or pervert the course of justice do not fairly arise against her from this reporting. We regret any distress caused.  • This article was amended on 29 March 2018 to clarify that although Shahmir Sanni works for TaxPayers’ Alliance as digital campaign manager, he does not work on pro-Brexit social media messaging. The Observer is the world's oldest Sunday newspaper, founded in 1791. It is published by Guardian News & Media and is editorially independent.
This scandal should cause uproar but the BBC and Labour just change the subject  The first duty of the leaders and citizens of a democracy is to defend its elections from subversion. Yet a country that boasts of giving the world free parliaments feels no obligation even to look at allegations that Russia subverted British democracy. The government and opposition are compromised and want the scandal closed down. As does an embarrassed rightwing press and a shamefully negligent BBC. “Suggest we send a note of support to the ambassador,” wrote Andy Wigmore, press officer for Nigel Farage’s Leave.EU just before the Brexit referendum. Documents seen by the Observer suggest that Arron Banks, who gave the campaign the largest political donation in British history, agreed. Whether a note was sent or not, Leave.EU supported the Kremlin line that it was not interfering in British politics. Pause to think about the scene described by Carole Cadwalladr in today’s Observer. The demagogues behind a lavishly funded campaign, whose claim to be patriots was accepted by 52% of the electorate, appeared to be scrambling to provide cover for a hostile foreign power. Why? I’ll leave you to read our pieces on the contacts between Russia and the Leave campaign and the ties that appear to bind Banks and Farage to Trump and Steve Bannon and on to Russia. Pay particular attention to the offers from the Russians to Banks of a stake in a goldmine. One issue remains: a campaign that purported to be for the “left behind” was organised and funded by men with links across the global network of far-right American demagogues and kleptomaniac dictators such as Putin. We know that Russia has interfered in elections in North America and Europe. Russia had a direct interest in promoting Brexit because it would destabilise a strategic rival. (Anyone who doubts me need only look at how Brexit has brought Whitehall close to collapse.) We know too that the Electoral Commission referred Banks’s campaign to the police for alleged “unlawful overspending” and has raised urgent questions about the behaviour of Boris Johnson and Michael Gove’s supposedly “respectable” alternative, Vote Leave. They deny any impropriety. Shouldn’t we be following the money? Broadcasters are a true reflection of a compromised political system The BBC, meanwhile, has more journalists than any other news organisation in Europe. Given its dominance, it is almost true to say news isn’t news until the BBC says it is. For months, you’d be forgiven for thinking its editors have not let its reporters cover Russia-Brexit. They can report on Trump’s links to Russia – and I suppose we should be grateful for that – but not on allegations of the subversion of the electoral process in the country whose taxes fund them. If the BBC mentions the Brexit scandal at all, it treats it as boxing match in which the corporation occupies the lofty position of impartial referee. Andrew Marr and the Today programme have both tried to titillate their audiences with catfights between Cadwalladr and Banks and Isabel Oakeshott, who helped Banks with Bad Boys of Brexit. They would be all very well if, to date, the BBC had not failed to produce investigative journalism of its own on the subject. Real journalism is hard work and, if the job is well done, its conclusions, however impartially presented, won’t make comfortable listening for ideological factions and moneyed interests with the wealth to hire libel lawyers. The usual complaint against the BBC is that, if you assert the world is round, it will scour the country to find a guest to argue that it’s flat. Its behaviour on the Brexit scandal is more disturbing than the usual fetishisation of balance. Rather than report, it has reduced public service broadcasting to a modern version of the Roman circus: a show that stops the plebs worrying their little heads about the future of their country. I’ve defended the BBC against Scottish nationalists, Corybnistas, Remainers and the Brexit right. But how can anyone respect a news organisation that prefers staged confrontations to reporting? On the Brexit scandal, the BBC offers something worse than fake news: it offers no news. In this, the broadcasters are a true reflection of a compromised political system. Alongside the Electoral Commission, the National Crime Agency and intelligence agencies ought to be investigating. Allegations that foreign states are trying to change the course of a nation’s history are too serious to be left to civil servants and junior officers. You only have to raise the possibility of a British version of the Mueller inquiry to realise why Labour and Conservatives, left and right, would hate it. The Tories are committed to Brexit. They will not push for investigations into a Brexit campaign whose wishes they are now meeting. Psychologically, Tories and the Tory press cannot separate the Russia allegations from Brexit. They fear that, if they look too hard, the legitimacy of the referendum will dissolve before their eyes. In the US, opposition Democrats want Trump’s every dealing with Russia exposed. But in Britain the leaders of the opposition Labour party are as anxious as Farage and May to change the subject. Never forget the far left’s soft spot for thieving autocrats. Jeremy Corbyn’s spokesman, Seumas Milne, flew to Sochi to bend his knee to Putin. Emily Thornberry defended Russia’s Syrian policy as reliably as Arron Banks. Even if you can put its attraction to dictators to one side, the London far left is in a marriage of convenience with the northern Labour right. Both are determined to stop free movement and keep Britain out of the single market: the Labour right because it fears that the charge of being soft on immigration will be electoral poison; the Corbyn left because it dreams of a “lexit” in which it will be free to build socialism in one country. For reasons of ideology and electoral calculation, we are stuck with an opposition that will not oppose. Can you begin to see why the scandal is not a scandal? In any other democracy, there would be uproar. But here, the Tory and Labour frontbenches must pretend there’s nothing to see. I’ll leave you with the Elizabethan courtier Sir John Harington, who explained in the 1590s how Russia has Britain where it wants it, when he said: Treason doth never prosper; What’s the Reason?Why, if it prosper none dare call it treason. • Nick Cohen is an Observer columnist
An 18-month investigation leads to a trail of new evidence showing the ‘bad boys of Brexit’ had closer links to Russia and its ambassador than they have disclosed   On 11 March 2016, three months before the European referendum, and long before anyone had started to wonder about foreign interference in the two political cataclysms of 2016 – Brexit and Trump – the Russian embassy in London put out a press release. Philip Hammond, the foreign secretary, had made a speech at Chatham House a few days earlier. A speech in which he noted that “the only country who would like us to leave the EU is Russia”. And the embassy had taken exception. A couple of hundred miles away, in Lysander House, Catbrain Lane, Bristol, a modern office block on a busy roundabout that serves as the headquarters of both Eldon Insurance – owned by local businessman Arron Banks – and the Leave.EU campaign team – funded by Arron Banks – it seems to have caught someone’s eye. The press release said it showed Russia “being dragged into the domestic debate on Brexit” as part of a “wicked Russia thesis”. Written more in the language of a slighted lover than a nation state, it claimed that “this was “unfair”, and the government needed to “explain itself”. “We wouldn’t have dwelt on it,” it said, had the British government not alluded to the Russian threat “at every opportunity”. The Leave.EU team appeared to think so, too. A message from an employee to Banks and Andy Wigmore, Leave.EU’s press spokesman and Banks’s business partner, sent on the same day – 11 March 2016 – says: “Pretty strong stuff from the Russian embassy! Risky area but this might possibly be worth using for a tile?” (A “tile” is an image that they could use in social media messaging, on Twitter or other platforms.) Last week, the Observer published details of multiple meetings between Banks and Wigmore and the Russian embassy, the details of which they confirmed when they passed the original emails to the Sunday Times in order to try to scoop us. The documents seen by the Observer suggest Banks replies: “I think we should – let’s draft a press release in response to the Russian letter.” The documents suggest that the employee’s response included a press release he says he has drafted on “the great looming threat” of Russia, though he notes that one of the sentences is optional as it “may be seen as too overtly Russophile”. Wigmore responds: “Suggest we send a note of support to the Ambassador.” It’s a brief exchange between colleagues – the language is matter-of-fact, the tone workaday, the import that there’s nothing unusual here. But two years on, in the midst of the Trump-Russia investigation, against the backdrop of a tumultuous week in parliament, including a parliamentary committee hearing at which Banks and Wigmore attacked MPs and then walked out, it suggests an extraordinary relationship. The foreign secretary of Britain had made critical remarks about a hostile foreign power. And, so these documents appear to suggest, prompted the Leave.EU team to swing into action in support of the hostile foreign power. And, astonishingly, to write a personal note of support to the country’s ambassador. Well done, Russia! 🇷🇺In ✅Crush ISIS ✅Withdraw ✅No nonsense. pic.twitter.com/89OCnZ7ktj Was the “personal note of support” sent? We don’t know, but it’s a fascinating, revealing, and disturbing insight into the nature of the relationship between officials representing the Russian government and the main funder of the Leave campaign. A relationship that was, until now, partly covert and hidden. And which Banks conceded in parliament on Tuesday that he’d lied about for two years. This was the campaign headed by Nigel Farage, whose close friend and ally, Steve Bannon, had been Trump’s campaign manager and who said, on Wednesday: “I have never received any Russian financial or political support...” And it plunges Britain directly into the same nexus of relationships that is the focus of special counsel Robert Mueller’s investigation. Two years on, we are in the dark about so much. What was the exact nature of Farage’s Leave.EU campaign’s relationship to the Russian government? Why did it exist? And to what end? Just last week, Farage robustly denied any improper relationship with the Russians on his radio show. So far, all that we can say for sure is that, for the last two years, Banks and Wigmore have lied about it. And, it’s this, perhaps, that raises the most critical question of all: why? A week and a half ago, a fellow journalist, Peter Jukes, showed me this material for the first time, and my jaw dropped. I’d left parliament where I’d heard Alexander Nix, the chief executive of Cambridge Analytica, give evidence to the investigation into fake news to a parliamentary inquiry over many hours. And later that night, I found myself looking at a computer screen that shone on a light on a part of the investigation that I had never expected to uncover. This was material – obtained legitimately – from inside the Leave.EU campaign. There were names, times, dates. Meetings. Official invitations. Gold deals. And, in a starring role, Ambassador Alexander Yakovenko, a name I knew instantly from FBI documents, who had been named by Mueller as a high-level intermediary between the Trump campaign and the Kremlin. There were references to the content of the astonishing email that Wigmore was said to have sent to his contact at the Russian embassy in August 2016. Farage had been on the campaign trail for Trump when his aide and fundraiser, George Cottrell, was arrested by the FBI on money-laundering charges. Material seen by the Observer suggests Wigmore sent confidential legal documents, including the FBI indictment, to the Russian embassy. And then there was the possibility of the gold deal. A deal, brokered by Yakovenko, and funded by the state-owned Russian bank, Sberbank, negotiated in the months leading up to the referendum, and announced on 5 July, 12 days after the country voted to leave the EU. There is no public record of whether Banks invested or not. Twelve days later, he tweeted: “I’m buying gold at the moment and big mining stocks.” For me, though, it was the material we are publishing, about “tiles” and social media messages, that raised the hairs on the back of my neck. Because I’ve been investigating this story, and this web of relationships between Trump, Russia, Cambridge Analytica and the Leave campaign for 18 months. And I’ve been on the receiving end of those “tiles”. Leave.EU has crafted social media messages targeted at me, aimed at discrediting me and my work. Messages, which last autumn, turned nasty. For most of last year, my relationship with Banks and Wigmore was knockabout. We trolled each other – seemingly good-humouredly – online. I’d scored a hit early on when my very first article triggered two investigations, by the Electoral Commission and the Information Commissioner’s Office. But, on the surface at least, they didn’t seem to hold it against me, or me them. But in late October/November, that changed. The public mood around Brexit was hardening. Crucial votes on the EU withdrawal bill were due and Mueller’s Trump-Russia investigation had started to bite. And, it was again, a Russian embassy press release that seems to have precipitated it. On 25 October, the Russian embassy directly addressed questions about Russian interference with a statement on its website: “Russia doesn’t intervene into internal affairs of other states... I am calling on the unscrupulous journalists and politicians: stop imposing this fake agenda[...]” Yakovenko calls on "unscrupulous journalists & politicians" to ditch "fake agenda" re Russian involvement in Brexit. https://t.co/wvM0ZUYzmL pic.twitter.com/ishQhLIGR2 Tweets from the embassy’s account revealed that the “unscrupulous journalists” seemed to be myself and Hugo Rifkind from the Times, and the politicians, two Labour MPs who’d raised questions on the subject in the house – Ben Bradshaw and Chris Bryant. Later that same day, Leave.EU’s official account put out a “tile”: “Yakovenko calls on ‘unscrupulous journalists and politicians’ to ditch ‘fake agenda’ re Russia involvement in Brexit,” it said. It was … unsettling. I had felt like I’d been operating in a hostile environment for a long period of time – the next week I received a third legal letter from Cambridge Analytica – but this was different. We know how the Russian state deals with journalists. As did Banks and Wigmore. A few months earlier, Banks tweeted: “@carolecadwalla wouldn’t be so lippy in Russia!” A tweet he has now deleted. But then it escalated. Two weeks later, the Observer received the first of a series of extraordinary letters from the Russian embassy – one of which came personally to me from Yakovenko – about my reporting. “We think it’s a textbook example of bad journalism which raises quite a few questions regarding the true colours of the reporter.” Then, on 13 November, a watershed moment, when Theresa May finally stood up and accused Russia of “weaponising information” and meddling in our democracy. That night, I tweeted it out. “Finally!” I said. The response was swift. The next day, Leave.EU’s official account tweeted a video, headlined: “@carolecadwalla takes a hit as the Russian conspiracy deepens.” It described me as “hysterical Guardian investigator Carole Codswallop”. The video was a clip of the film Airplane! and they had photoshopped my face into that of a “hysterical” woman being hit repeatedly around the head. The last frame showed a woman with a gun. In the background, the Russian anthem played. I saw it, sitting at my kitchen table, where I live alone, and was, at first, bewildered. Bewildered, and over the course of the next 42 hours, freaked out. Hundreds of people reported it to Twitter and the police, but still it stayed up. On the evening of the second day, I asked my editor to intervene. That night, he wrote to Wigmore. The next morning, it finally came down. On Twitter, I wrote: “It was intended to unsettle me. And it did.” I have a different relationship to this story, to these revelations, perhaps, than most. Because I have experienced the impact of this relationship with Russia, first-hand. I have felt it and lived it – viscerally, emotionally. But it was always there, out in the open. There was nothing hidden or covert about the hundreds of social media postings and tweets that showed Leave.EU’s and Farage’s support of Russian policies and the Russian political agenda. What I hadn’t contemplated, until now, was that this may have been co-ordinated with the Russian government. That Banks and Wigmore may have been communicating with the embassy when they were launching these attacks. That they may have sent other “messages of support” to the Russian ambassador when May made that speech, or I wrote my articles, or Bradshaw and Bryant asked their questions. Arron Banks and Andy Wigmore have declined to answer any questions the Observer put to him. Did the deal take place? The gold deal that Yakovenko made the introduction for? Journalists and investigators will hopefully now try to find out, to unravel the complex, offshore structures through which Banks runs his businesses. Because what we appear to see through Banks and Wigmore is a linked series of relationships between the Trump campaign – via Steve Bannon – to the public face of Leave.EU’s campaign, Nigel Farage. Through Farage to Banks and Wigmore. And through Banks and Wigmore to the Russian government. Whether it’s a channel for anything else is for other specialist investigators to figure out. Because ever since Watergate, we’ve known that you need to follow the money. But, in this the new age of information, there are new lines to pursue. One can follow the lies, for example. The meetings Banks and Wigmore admit they lied about, a third passport – a diplomatic one from Belize – that Banks told me about last year, but which he denied to MPs on Tuesday. Wigmore is the country’s trade envoy to the UK. A legal letter they told MPs they’d sent to the Atlantic Council but which the head counsel of the Atlantic Council told the Observer, many months ago, they had never received. In 2016, Brexit and Trump were the first fake news elections. Though by “fake news”, one means sophisticated information operations, developed out of hybrid warfare techniques – pioneered by Russia and now aped across the world. In 1972, the year of the Watergate break-in, money was the sole source of power. Today, information is also power. This is “asymmetric warfare”. It’s how an economically struggling power – Russia – can strike a blow against the richest nation in the world. Through weaponising words. And unleashing them in ways we can’t understand or even see. Because you can also follow the tweets. Follow the Facebook posts. Follow the memes. It’s all out there: the Leave campaign’s intimate relationship with the Russian government appears public, visible, undisguised. Just as Banks – and his ghostwriter, Isabel Oakeshott – were careful to include the approach from the Russian embassy and a nine-hour “boozy lunch” in The Bad Boys of Brexit, is this a relationship between the Russians and the Leave campaign that is hiding in plain sight? What we know now is that this relationship is deeper and more complex than we could have imagined. And that Banks and Wigmore lied about it: to the public, to parliament. And we don’t know why. What we don’t know, or at least I don’t know, is whether this is collusion. If the Leave campaign colluded with the Russian government. That’s a word freighted with meaning and significance. A question that Farage won’t answer. When I rang into his LBC phone-in show on Monday, he slammed down the phone on me, in what, in the video, looks like a moment of panic. We don’t know if there was collusion. But here’s what we do know, what these communications suggest to us: that there was co-ordination.
Call from former minister comes as Theresa May suffers another resignation in protest at her Chequers plan    Justine Greening has said she believes other senior Conservative MPs also support the idea of a second referendum to end a likely parliamentary deadlock on Brexit, after she became the most high-profile Tory to endorse such a move. The former education secretary and remain supporter said Theresa May’s Chequers plan “in practice suits no one” and would be rejected by both remainers and leavers. A new referendum would provide “a route forwards”, she said. Writing in the Times, the MP for Putney said the “only solution is to take the final Brexit decision out of the hands of deadlocked politicians” by letting voters choose from three options: May’s final deal, a no-deal Brexit or staying in the EU. Greening proposed a system using first and second-preference votes to ensure the preferred model achieved more then 50% of the final vote. Speaking later on Monday on BBC Radio 4’s Today programme, Greening said she expected other senior Tories would support the idea.  “I think what I’m saying is what everyone is seeing in parliament,” she said. Asked whether that meant other leading Conservatives would support her specific plan, she said: “Yes, I believe so.” Also on Monday, May suffered another resignation in protest at her Chequers plan. Scott Mann, the MP for North Cornwall, stepped down as parliamentary private secretary to the Treasury, saying he could not support a “watered-down Brexit”. “Over the coming days, weeks and months, I fear that elements of the Brexit white paper will inevitably put me in direct conflict with the views expressed by a large section of my constituents,” he said. Greening said she thought May’s Chequers proposal was now dead. It was a “genuine, clever attempt at a compromise” but had proved to be unworkable, she said. “Yes, because I think in practice is suits no one, and whether you’re a remainer who looks at it and thinks, actually, we’re signing up to all the rules but now we won’t be around the table to influence them, or indeed you’re a leaver, who says this doesn’t give us the clean break we want, it doesn’t keep anyone happy,” Greening said. “I think that millions of people who voted for leave will feel that this approach is not what they voted for in the referendum in 2016. The basic problem we’ve got is that Westminster works on party lines, but Brexit is above party politics, and so in a way it’s not set up to deal with this issue.” What was needed was “a clear route forward that settles this European question once and for all”, Greening said. “We have to be pragmatic now about the fact parliament will not be able to take a decision on this final deal. “I don’t believe what we need is more time. What we need is a proper decision that we can follow through on as a country.” The idea was dismissed by Bernard Jenkin, a hardline pro-leave Tory MP. “It’s a little ill-thought out, I’m afraid,” he told Today. “If we wanted to extend the uncertainty for another long period, this is one way of doing it.” He said the solution to the deadlock was more MPs supporting his view of Brexit. “It is stalemated because the elected politicians are, some of them, refusing to implement the decision that was taken by the British people,” Jenkin said. Given that parliament could not agree to May’s plan, he continued, a no-deal Brexit based on WTO rules should be looked at. Challenged on the strong opposition to this from business groups, Jenkin said: “Well, businesses are lobbying for their bottom lines and their profits.” Greening’s move has already been seized on by campaign groups seeking a second referendum, as well as by the Liberal Democrats, who said the comments “show that the sensible MPs in the Conservative party recognise the chaos wrought by a divided government”. Unhappiness from the Tory right over May’s proposed Brexit deal, and their threats to vote it down when a promised meaningful final vote is held in parliament around the turn of the year, have prompted growing speculation that the prime minister may struggle to ensure that whatever she negotiates will be approved by MPs, placing Britain’s future relationship with Europe in limbo. Other high-profile figures have started to use the belief that there is political deadlock to advance arguments for a second referendum. On Sunday, Tony Blair said in a post on the website for his Institute for Global Change that there should be another national vote, because there would be no House of Commons majority for May’s Brexit, a no-deal Brexit or for remaining in the EU. Blair also suggested there should be three choices for voters. “The question may be complicated because it really involves three choices: Clean Break, ‘soft’ or stay. But the complexity is not insuperable,” he said.

Report by Belgian prosecutors believed to support allegations made by Edward Snowden   British spies are likely to have hacked into Belgium’s biggest telecommunications operator for at least a two-year period on the instruction of UK ministers, a confidential report submitted by Belgian prosecutors is said to have concluded. The finding would support an allegation made by the whistleblower Edward Snowden five years ago when he leaked 20 slides exposing the targets of hacking by the British intelligence service GCHQ. According to unconfirmed reports in the Belgian media, the federal prosecutors’ report suggests the hackers closed their operation within a matter of minutes of being exposed in August 2013. It is believed the interception of Belgacom, now Proximus, had been ongoing since at least 2011. The justice minister, Koen Geens, has confirmed he has received the report and that it will be discussed within the national security council, led by the prime minister, Charles Michel. The British spies are said to have targeted the computers of Belgacom employees working in security and maintenance with faked LinkedIn messages. There was a particular focus on the Belgian company’s subsidiary unit, Belgacom International Carrier Services, which handles phone and data traffic in Africa and the Middle East. It is reported that the espionage – given the the codename Operation Socialist – was also seeking to target communications made between roaming smartphones. The interception would have provided access to communications at Nato headquarters in Brussels and at key European institutions including the European commission, European parliament, and the European Council. The operation was the first documented example of an EU member state covertly hacking into the critical infrastructure of another. The unpublished prosecutors’ report is said to indicate that the spying operation must have been authorised at the highest levels of the British government. In 2011 William Hague was Britain’s foreign secretary. The report is said to conclude there is not enough evidence to prosecute any individual. When approached by the Belgian daily newspaper De Tijd, a spokesman for the federal prosecutor declined to comment on the report. The spokesman told the newspaper that the situation was “too delicate right now”. GCHQ has also declined to comment. The slides leaked five years ago by Snowden, a former contractor for the US National Security Agency, came from the Network Analysis Centre, a department of GCHQ. Elio di Rupo, the Belgian prime minister at the time, promised to take “the appropriate steps” if the “high-level involvement” of a foreign country was confirmed. The Belgian government, a major shareholder in Belgacom, has spent €50m on improving the company’s security in the wake of the hacking scandal.
It became the stumbling block to Theresa May getting her deal approved by parliament, and remains a contentious Brexit negotiation issue   Once more commonly heard in talk about baseball than politics, the backstop has become one of the most discussed and contentious elements of the Brexit negotiations. It is a simple basic principle, but no one is able to agree precisely how it will work. Variously described as an insurance policy or safety net, the backstop is a device intended to ensure there will not be a hard border between Northern Ireland and the Republic of Ireland, even if no formal deal can be reached on trade and security arrangements. It would mean that if there were no workable agreement on such matters, Northern Ireland would stay in the customs union and much of the single market, guaranteeing a friction-free border with the Republic. This would keep commitments of the Good Friday agreement intact. Both the UK and EU signed up to the basic idea in December 2017 as part of the initial Brexit deal, and it was formalised in the legal text of the withdrawal agreement, but there have been disagreements since on how it would work. The DUP has objected to it, as it potentially treats Northern Ireland differently from the rest of the UK, creating a customs divide in the Irish Sea, which is anathema to the unionist party. Hardline Tory Eurosceptics also object to it, as they perceive it to be a trap that could potentially lock the UK into the EU’s customs union permanently if the UK and EU cannot seal a free trade agreement. That would prevent the UK from doing its own free trade deals with nations outside the bloc. In January 2019, the “joint interpretative instrument” – a legal add-on to the withdrawal agreement – was given to Theresa May to try to help her to get her deal through the UK parliament. It gives legal force to a letter from Jean-Claude Juncker and Donald Tusk, then presidents of the commission and council. This letter stated the EU’s intention to negotiate an alternative to the backstop so it would not be triggered, or, if it was triggered, to get out of it as quickly as possible. In addition, a unilateral statement from the UK set out the British position that, if the backstop was to become permanent and talks on an alternative were going nowhere, the UK believed it would be able to exit the arrangement. Additional language was added to the political declaration that emphasised the urgency felt on both sides to negotiate an alternative to the backstop, and to flesh out what a technological fix would look like. However, it failed to persuade the attorney general, Geoffrey Cox, who said that while it ‘reduces the risk’ of the UK being trapped in a backstop indefinitely, it does not remove it. Theresa May could still not get parliament to approve her deal. During their campaigns to become prime minister, both Conservative party leadership contenders, Boris Johnson and Jeremy Hunt, appear to have declared the Northern Ireland backstop “dead”, and promised to throw it out of any deal they negotiate with the EU. The EU has repeatedly stated that it will not reopen the withdrawal agreement for renegotiation.
 
In the dark imagination of English reactionaries, Britain is always a defeated nation – and the EU is the imaginary invader by  Fintan O'Toole  Before the narrative of Len Deighton’s bestselling thriller SS-GB begins, there is a “reproduction” of an authentic-looking rubber-stamped document: “Instrument of Surrender – English Text. Of all British armed forces in United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland including all islands.” It is dated 18 February 1941. After ordering the cessation of all hostilities by British forces, it sets down further conditions, including “the British Command to carry out at once, without argument or comment, all further orders that will be issued by the German Command on any subject. Disobedience of orders, or failure to comply with them, will be regarded as a breach of these surrender terms and will be dealt with by the German Command in accordance with the laws and usages of war.” Written amid the anxieties of Britain’s early membership of the European Communities and published in 1978, Deighton’s thriller sets up two ideas that will become important in the rhetoric of Brexit. Since there is no sense that Deighton has a conscious anti-EU agenda, the idea seems to arise from a deeper structure of feeling in England. One is the fear of the Englishman turning into the “new European”, fitting himself into the structures of German domination. His central character is a harbinger of the “rootless cosmopolitan” who cannot be trusted to uphold English independence and English values, and who therefore functions as the enemy within, the quisling class of pro-Europeans. This is the treason of the elite, the puppet politicians and sleek mandarins who quickly accommodate themselves to the new regime. Deighton was building on real historical memories of the appeasers whose prewar conduct makes the notion that they would have quickly become collaborators in the event of a defeat to the Nazis highly credible. This idea of a treacherous elite would later ferment into a heady and intoxicating brew of suspicion that the Brexiteers would both dispense to the masses and consume themselves. (In 2014, the BBC announced plans for a five-part TV version, which was screened in 2017, shortly after Brexit.) The other crucial idea here is the vertiginous fall from “heart of Empire” to “occupied colony”. In the imperial imagination, there are only two states: dominant and submissive, coloniser and colonised. This dualism lingers. If England is not an imperial power, it must be the only other thing it can be: a colony. And, as Deighton successfully demonstrated, this logic can be founded in an alternative English history. The moment of greatest triumph – the defeat of the Nazis – can be reimagined as the moment of greatest humiliation – defeat by the Nazis. The pain of colonisation and defeat can, in the context of uneasy membership of the EU, be imaginatively appropriated. (Boris Johnson, in the Telegraph of 12 November, claimed that “we are on the verge of signing up for something even worse than the current constitutional position. These are the terms that might be enforced on a colony.”) SS-GB was in part the inspiration for an even more successful English thriller, Robert Harris’s multimillion-selling Fatherland, published in 1992 and filmed for television in 1994. Harris had begun the novel in the mid-1980s but abandoned it. He revived and finished it explicitly in the context of German reunification in 1990 and of fears that the enemy Britain had defeated twice in the 20th century would end the century by dominating it: “If,” Harris wrote in the introduction to the 20th anniversary edition in 2012, “there was one factor that suddenly gave my fantasy of a united Germany a harder edge, it was the news that exactly such an entity was unexpectedly returning to the heart of Europe.” In retrospect, German reunification is perhaps the greatest missed opportunity for the English finally to have done with the war. Had there been a capacity to generate new narratives of Europe, this could have been shaped as a moment of British vindication – the final working-out of the consequences of nazism. As Anthony Barnett puts it, “the triumph and relief of the unification of Germany could and should have belonged to us in Britain, as well as to Germany itself. It was the final liberation from nazism, the end of that country’s punishment, a time to welcome a great culture back into our arms.” Why, then, were there no photographs of Margaret Thatcher and Helmut Kohl holding hands at the Brandenburg Gate to match the pictures of Kohl and François Mitterrand at Verdun in 1984? Because Thatcher literally carried in her handbag maps showing German expansion under the Nazis. This was a mental cartography that English conservatism could not transcend – the map of a Europe that may no longer exist in reality, but within which its imagination remains imprisoned. “Europe,” Barnett writes, “moved on from the second world war and Britain didn’t.” One might go so far as to say that England never got over winning the war. In fact, Britain not only did not move on in 1990 – with the resurrection of a united Germany, it moved back. Harris is no anti-European reactionary and would become one of the most furious critics of Brexit. Yet, like Deighton, he was tapping into profound national anxieties. The real twist of the knife in Harris’s story is that the novel is set in Germany and the main characters are German. There is nothing of significance to say about England 20 years after its surrender. Except, that is, that is part of a European Union: “In the west, 12 nations – Portugal, Spain, France, Ireland, Great Britain, Belgium, Holland, Italy, Denmark, Norway, Sweden and Finland – had been corralled by Germany, under the Treaty of Rome, into a European trading bloc. German was the official second language in all schools. People drove German cars, listened to German radios, watched German televisions, worked in German-owned factories, moaned about the behaviour of German tourists in German-dominated holiday resorts, while German teams won every international sporting competition except cricket, which only the English played.” A dystopian fantasy this may be, but in the English reactionary imagination, dystopian fantasy was and is indistinguishable from reality. Rhetorically, it was commonplace among British anti-Europeans that the EU was a continuation in another, more insidious form, of previous attempts at domination from the continent. In 1989, for example, the Bruges Group of anti-European Tories heard Prof Kenneth Minogue of the London School of Economics tell them that “the European institutions were attempting to create a European Union, in the tradition of the mediaeval popes, Charlemagne, Napoleon, the Kaiser and Adolf Hitler”. The sleight of hand was not subtle: Hitler tried to unite Europe, so does the EU, therefore the EU is a Hitlerian project. But the lack of subtlety did not stop the trope from being used in the Brexit campaign: “Napoleon, Hitler, various people tried this [unifying Europe], and it ends tragically. The EU is an attempt to do this by different methods,” Boris Johnson told the Telegraph on 14 May 2016, a month before the referendum. That Napoleon and “various people” were not the point of the argument became clear in Johnson’s reiteration of the real point: that the EU was “pursuing a similar goal to Hitler in trying to create a powerful superstate”. While Harris was writing Fatherland in 1990, the British secretary of state for trade and industry, Nicholas Ridley, a close friend and ally of the prime minister, Margaret Thatcher, told the Spectator that the European monetary system being introduced by the EU was “all a German racket designed to take over the whole of Europe … I’m not against giving up sovereignty in principle, but not to this lot. You might as well give it to Adolf Hitler, frankly … I’m not sure I wouldn’t rather have the shelters and the chance to fight back than simply being taken over by economics.” The cover of that issue of the Spectator’s bore the headline “Speaking for England” – a conscious reference to one of the moments of high drama in September 1939 when Leo Amery in the House of Commons invited Labour’s Arthur Greenwood to “Speak for England!”, implying that the appeasing prime minister Neville Chamberlain did not do so. Ridley’s remarks were dismissed by Lutz Stavenhagen, minister of state in the German foreign office, as the sort of thing that might be heard “in the pub after a football match”. And Ridley himself had to resign. But these were not the mere rantings of a marginal crank. As Peter Jenkins wrote in the Independent at the time, “it is widely supposed that Mrs Thatcher’s heart is with him, if not her head … It is no secret that she, like him, fears that monetary and economic union in Europe will become the tool of German domination rather than the means of containing a united Germany. She too instinctively mistrusts the Germans and finds it impossible to forget the experiences of the second world war.” Thatcher had the Falklands war. It may have been a last hurrah for Britain’s imperial pretensions, but it functioned even better as a kind of epilogue to the great psychodrama of the second world war and a real-life version of the invasion thrillers. In her victory speech of July 1982, Thatcher was quite explicit in invoking the Falklands as a renaissance of the old wartime spirit, and victory as proof that Britain was no different then from what it had been during its Finest Hour. She chided those who believed that “we could never again be what we were”. The doubters “were wrong. The lesson of the Falklands is that Britain has not changed and that this nation still has those sterling qualities which shine through our history. This generation can match their fathers and grandfathers in ability, in courage, and in resolution. We have not changed. When the demands of war and the dangers to our own people call us to arms – then we British are as we have always been.” Yet even in this triumphal mode, Thatcher gave new life to the metaphors of retreat and invasion. “We have ceased to be a nation in retreat,” she said, implying that the nation had been precisely that for a long time. “Why,” she asked, “do we have to be invaded before we throw aside our selfish aims and begin to work together … ?” Within this question is a claim: “we” were invaded. The beauty of the Falklands conflict is that it played out the invasion fantasy of SS-GB – a fascist regime violating the sanctity of the homeland – but at a safe distance of almost 8,000 miles. The tiny population of the Falklands – 1,820 people in 1982 – served as a metaphor for the UK. “British people,” said Thatcher, “had to be threatened by foreign soldiers and British territory invaded and then – why then – the response was incomparable.” What had not happened in 1939–45 had finally happened in 1982. It helped that the tiny Falklands population that was serving this microcosmic function was almost entirely white – a “British people” that no longer existed – and that this “British territory” was an almost entirely rural landscape. The Falklands was a kind of make-believe England with no black and brown immigrants. Its pre-industrial terrain was a fantasy version of the post-industrial landscape that Thatcher herself was in fact creating at home in England, without the empty steel plants and rusting machines. It was not just war that was needed to reassure Britain that it had a meaningful collective existence, it was the idea of invasion and submission. There could be no release from the dark fantasies haunting the imagination of British conservatism, and there would continue to be a need for an imaginary invader and dominator. In 1990, while Germany was being reunified, there was very little depth to anti-German feeling in Britain – surveys at the time showed that most British people were in favour of German unity and trusted the Germans a lot or somewhat. The imagining of a German-dominated Europe through the evocation of Hitler was not an authentic popular prejudice against an old enemy. It was a way – albeit one that still seemed to have few real-world consequences – of thinking about the European Union itself, of summoning it into being as the ghastly ghost, not just of the Nazis, but of Nazis who had in reality won the war. The war imagery filled a hole. England had no deep imaginative commitment to the European project. As an idea, the EU had a distinctly weak grip on English allegiance. It was always understood by most people as a more or less grudging concession to reality, a matter for resigned acceptance rather than joyous embrace. The popular mood a year after Britain joined was nicely captured by an official at the Department of Trade and Industry, who likened the British public to “a crowd of holidaymakers who, after much doubt and expense, have made a dangerous journey only to find the climate chilly, the hotel not what it was cracked up to be and the food too expensive … bloodthirsty feelings are mounting, not only towards the other nationalities in the hotel but to the courier who got them there.” The sheer volatility of public opinion in Britain was clear in the 1975 referendum on whether or not to stay in the common market: between January and June 1975, Harold Wilson’s government managed to turn a 57% leave preference in polls to a 67% remain vote on the day. The referendum was “the only really sustained debate the British had ever had on their role in the world” and, as the Daily Express put it, in a jubilant editorial: “Britain’s Yes to Europe” had rung “louder, clearer and more unanimous than any decision in peacetime history”. Yet a result that seemed both decisive and conclusive proved to be neither – Europe continued to poison British politics. And perhaps one of the reasons it did so is that, as the 1975 referendum campaign showed, there was a very deep underlying division about the meaning of the second world war. The war was – and remains – crucial in structuring English feeling about the European Union. In 1975, many of the leading advocates on both sides were veterans, as were many voters. But instead of this common experience creating a common emotional ideal of Britain’s relationship to Europe, it fed two completely opposite stories, each very deeply felt. One of these stories was that the catastrophic experience of the first half of the 20th century carried two lessons that must never be forgotten: unrestrained nationalism led to war, and Britain could not stand aside from the fate of Europe. As the historian Robert Saunders has shown, the successful pro-European campaigners in 1975 were both highly explicit and highly emotive in making these connections. For them, “the emphasis was on the horror of war, which had devoured millions of lives in the prosecution of national rivalries. Britain in Europe used the poppy, the flower of remembrance, in its literature, while its logo was a dove of peace.” Pro-Europe posters said “Nationalism kills” and “No more Civil Wars”. Another, published for the anniversary of victory in Europe, directly evoked the joy of that triumph and sought to channel it into a sense that the common market was the great reward for victory: “On VE Day we celebrated the beginnings of peace. Vote Yes to make sure we keep it.” Another poster read simply: “Forty million people died in two European wars this century. Better lose a little sovereignty than a son or daughter.” These appeals worked for the majority of voters, but this very mention of sovereignty opened up, for a significant minority, a gaping wound. “For some,” wrote Saunders, “the surrender of national sovereignty to the EEC was a betrayal of all those who had fought and died ‘to deliver Europe from Nazi dictatorship’.” A woman from Bournemouth wrote to the anti-EEC Labour minister Barbara Castle that “I … did not fight and suffer a war for six years to be dictated to by the Germans.” “Hitler’s ghost,” wrote another of Castle’s correspondents, “must be shaking with laughter at Roy Jenkins, Hattersley & the rest of the traitor crew.” Some, Saunders writes, “viewed the Community as a new power-grab by Germany, a country which ‘on two occasions … has failed to conquer the British militarily’”. For Castle’s correspondents, the notion “that the GERMANS love us any more today than they did in 1914 & 1939” was dismissed with contempt. “The leopard does not easily change its spots.” What’s striking is that we can begin to see in this hysterical rhetoric the outlines of two notions that would become crucial to Brexit discourse. One is the comparison of pro-European Brits to quislings, collaborators, appeasers and traitors. The leave campaign in 1975 likened the treaty of accession to the Munich agreement of 1938, remembered as a shameful act of surrender to the Germans. Christopher Frere-Smith, who ran the Get Britain Out campaign, warned repeatedly that accession to the common market marked a “new Munich”, with Ted Heath and Roy Jenkins (who was leading the in campaign) playing the roles of Neville Chamberlain and his foreign secretary Lord Halifax. Voters were warned not be “fooled by the press bosses and the establishment politicians. They were wrong about Hitler and they’re wrong again.” But the other idea is the fever-dream of an English Resistance, and its weird corollary: a desire to have actually been invaded so that one could – gloriously – resist. And not just resist but, in the ultimate apotheosis of masochism, die. Part of the allure of romantic anti-imperial nationalism is martyrdom. The executed leaders of the Easter Rising in Dublin in 1916, for example, stand as resonant examples of the potency of the myth of blood sacrifice. But in the ironic reversal of zombie imperialism, the appropriation of the imagery of resistance to a former colonising power, this romance of martyrdom is mobilized as defiance of the EU. In his anguished complaint about the vitiating effects of membership of the common market in 1977, Enoch Powell lamented: “The breath which condemns submission to laws this nation has not made condemns submission to scales of value which this nation had not willed. To both sorts of submission I ascribe the haunting fear, which I am sure I am not alone in feeling, that we, the British, will soon have nothing left to die for. That was not a slip of the tongue. What a man lives for is what a man dies for, because every bit of living is a bit of dying. Patriotism is to have a nation to die for, and to be glad to die for it – all the days of one’s life.” This takes martyrdom to new levels of self-annihilating fantasy: death in the anti-EU resistance is not a fate or even an act. It is a daily pleasure. The anti-Europe campaign in 1975 very consciously evoked the language of wartime resistance. The Common Market Safeguards Campaign published a newspaper called Resistance News, and the group of MPs around the leading Tory leaver, Neil Marten, was known as the “R” Group – R for resistance. During the war, Marten had been dropped into both France and Norway to work with the resistance movements, so presumably his followers could think of themselves operating behind enemy lines in deepest Dorset. All of this is much more ’Allo, ’Allo! than Army of Shadows – tragedy played out the second time as farce. But, in what would become the camp sitcom of Brexit, that would not diminish its force. Europe’s role in this weird psychodrama is entirely pre-scripted. It does not greatly matter what the European Union is or what it is doing – its function in the plot is to be a more insidious form of nazism. This is important to grasp, because one of the key arguments in mainstream pro-Brexit political and journalistic discourse would be that Britain had to leave because the Europe it had joined was not the Europe it found itself part of in 2016. In Andrew Gilligan’s formulation on the 40th anniversary of British accession in the Telegraph in 2012, “the British people joined, and were happy to join, a common market. They did not sign up to a social chapter, a single currency or any moves down the road to a superstate.” Or as Boris Johnson put it in September 2017, the “post-imperial future” was “sold to the people purely as a common market, a way of maximising trade”. But “then came the gradual realisation that this was a very different agenda, an attempt not just at economic but political integration of a kind that the British people had never bargained for.” In itself, this is no more than usually mendacious – the truth being that “ever closer union” was always an explicit part of what the British signed up to in 1973 and voted for in 1975. What matters, though, is the way it misses the point. The idea of Europe as a soft-Nazi superstate was vividly present in 1975, even when the still-emerging EU had a much weaker, less evolved and less intrusive form. The imaginary existential struggle between the gallant English Resistance and the Euroreich was already being played out in one part of English consciousness. It was not a product of the ways in which the nine-member Common Market became the 28-member European Union. It was a product of England’s deeply divided and strangely unsettled relationship to the second world war and what it meant. Yet what brings these disparate modes together is the lure of self-pity, the weird need to dream England into a state of awful oppression. If we return to Nicholas Ridley’s rant, the striking thing is the way it wishes Britain back into wartime: “I’d rather have the shelters and the chance to fight back.” This suggests that what Britain was experiencing in the 1990s at the hands of the EU was actually worse than the war of 1939–45 in which it triumphed. And what could be worse than winning the war? Only losing it. Ridley’s conjuring of the EU as a “German racket designed to take over the whole of Europe” evokes a worse kind invasion than that in Deighton’s SS-GB: invasion by stealth. The suggestion is that a physical invasion by the Nazis would have been preferable to the membership of the EU which achieved the same ends by more cunning and dishonourable means. At least the Nazis could have been, in Churchill’s great and galvanic rhetoric, fought on the beaches, hills, fields and streets. They offered the “chance to fight back”. The new German invasion, cloaked in the guise of peaceful cooperation, is more damnable because it does not give the English Resistance a proper physical target. Hostility to the EU thus opens the way to a bizarre logic in which a Nazi invasion would have been, relatively speaking, welcome. This is a deeply strange kind of displacement – a victor learning to think like the vanquished. But it makes a kind of sense. On the one hand, as the white paper on entry to the common market emphasised in 1971, the experience of not being invaded was one of the genuinely distinctive things about being British: “Our physical assets and our economy had suffered less disastrously than those of other western European countries as a result of the war: nor did we suffer the shock of invasion. We were thus less immediately conscious of the need for us to become part of the unity in Europe.” Yet the paper went on to contrast the fate of Britain since the war with that of the six members of the existing common market, all of whom had been invaded: “The contrast between their experiences in recent years as members of the Communities, and ours outside, when our resources have not been growing sufficiently to do all we should like to do at home and abroad, suggests that they chose the right road … All the Community countries enjoyed rates of growth of gross national product (GNP) per head of population, or of private consumption per head, roughly twice as great as Britain’s.” It was not entirely ridiculous at some subliminal level to see these two things – being invaded and growing twice as fast as the country that wasn’t – as cause and effect. The “right road” to prosperity did not seem to lie through successful self-defence – on the contrary, invasion worked well for the six. Britain was genuinely in a topsy-turvy situation, the winner that had been surpassed by the losers. Why not draw a topsy-turvy conclusion: in a dark stratum of the reactionary mind, we must think of ourselves as a defeated nation? And if Britain was to be defeated, the EU must be its invasive oppressor. Must be, because there was no other possible candidate. The very absurdity of this notion was its strength. The paranoiac must at some stage ask himself: but why are they out to get me? Since there was no actual evidence of any western European hostility, the answer must lie in some deeply hidden motivation. How could they hate us when we saved them in the war? The proto-Brexiteers came up with a counter-factual truth that was at the same time highly satisfying: they hate us because we saved them. Since the English mood in relation to joining Europe was largely one of surrendering to necessity, it was not so hard to think of the act as surrender full stop. In the literary journal Encounter’s 1971 symposium on whether the UK should join the common market, for example, Sir William Hayter, warden of New College, Oxford, and former British ambassador to Moscow, looked back on his contribution to its debates almost a decade earlier: “in 1962 I wrote that ‘in a few years we shall have to make an unconditional surrender to get in’. I am afraid those few years have gone by, and now it is not even certain that an unconditional surrender will get us in.” Peter Shore MP, the most persistent Labour party critic of Europe, during the 1975 referendum took up this theme: “What the advocates of membership are saying … is that we are finished as a country; that the long and famous story of the British nation and people has ended; that we are now so weak and powerless that we must accept terms and conditions, penalties and limitations almost as though we had suffered defeat in a war.” It was a masochistic rhetoric that would return in full force as the Brexit negotiations failed to produce the promised miracles. This is an edited extract from Heroic Failure: Brexit and the Politics of Pain by Fintan O’Toole, published on 22 November by Head of Zeus, and available at guardianbookshop.com • Follow the Long Read on Twitter at @gdnlongread, or sign up to the long read weekly email here.
What does the agreement say? Which bits are controversial? And will it now get through parliament?   Two and a half years after Britain voted to leave the EU, the UK cabinet on Wednesday night backed the text of the draft withdrawal agreement drawn up by British and European negotiators – but with a series of ministerial resignations already on Thursday, the fallout has already begun. Here is a non-exhaustive guide to what the agreement broadly says, which parts of it are proving controversial (and why), how likely the prime minister now is to get it through parliament, and what could happen next. Think of it as the separation agreement between the UK and the EU. Running to 585 pages, it covers three main areas: Britain’s financial settlement with the EU to meet agreed commitments. The post-Brexit rights of EU citizens in the UK and British citizens on the continent. A mechanism to prevent a “hard border” on the island of Ireland. The agreement also includes a much sketchier (and non-binding) seven-page political declaration outlining the two sides’ ambitions for their desired future trading relationship, on which negotiations have yet formally to start. While some of the detail took longer, the UK and EU agreed reasonably quickly on the so-called divorce bill and citizens’ rights. The sticking point was the border between Northern Ireland and the Republic of Ireland, which after Brexit will also become the border between the UK and the EU. Because of the island’s troubled history, both sides want to avoid a hard border with customs checks that could become a source of friction. The problem has been that, because the prime minister promised in January 2017 to take Britain out of both the EU’s single market (so as not to be an EU “rule-taker”) and the customs union (to allow it to strike its own trade deals around the world), customs and regulatory checks became almost inevitable. The EU’s single market is more than a free-trade area. It aims to remove not just the fiscal barriers to trade (tariffs) but the physical and technical barriers (borders and divergent product standards) too by allowing as free movement as possible of goods, capital, services and people. In essence, it is about treating the EU as a single trading territory. See our full Brexit phrasebook. The European Union is a customs union. It allows free trade between countries inside it and allows imports in to the area by setting common tariffs. The area does not just include EU members. For instance, Turkey is part of the customs union for manufactured goods but not services or agriculture. The single market involves deeper integration of free movement of people, goods, services and money. This means laws need to be aligned. Some countries have access to the single market without being members of the EU’s customs union. Ultimately, the Irish border is supposed to become a non-issue under the terms of the comprehensive free trade agreement (FTA) that the two sides are due to sign at some stage after Britain’s departure from the bloc on 29 March next year. But because this may well not be negotiated by the end of the transition period in December 2020, the EU insisted on a “backstop” arrangement to avoid a hard border until a FTA came into effect. The row over the form this backstop should take is what prevented the withdrawal agreement from being sealed for so long. For months, Britain rejected the EU’s proposed backstop – in effect, keeping Northern Ireland in the customs union and single market – because it would require customs checks for goods crossing the Irish Sea and other arrangements meaning Northern Ireland was treated differently to the rest of the UK. But the EU also rejected Britain’s suggestion that the whole of the UK should stay in a de facto customs union with the EU, mainly because the government wanted to be able to withdraw from such an arrangement unilaterally and at a time of its choosing (which, for the EU, meant it could not be considered a proper backstop). The solution involved concessions on both sides. For the EU, the chief negotiator, Michel Barnier, accepted the idea of a whole-UK customs union with the EU, satisfying the UK’s demands that its territorial integrity must be preserved. But in return, Britain must accept that it will not be allowed to exit the backstop “unless and until” the EU agrees there is no prospect of a return to a hard border. It must also accept special “deeper” customs arrangements, closer to the single market, for Northern Ireland, and the EU’s so-called “level playing field” conditions for the whole of the UK. These address member states’ concerns that de facto customs union membership without the obligations of the single market could give the UK an unfair advantage, so will require Britain to abide by EU rules on, for example, state aid, competition, the environment, tax and labour conditions. Hardly. Conservative Brexiters, as is plain from Brexit secretary, Dominic Raab’s resignation letter, are appalled at the prospect of Britain potentially being “trapped” forever in a customs union with the EU – and at being forced to continue accepting EU regulations to boot. The Northern Ireland unionists of the DUP – on whose votes in Westminster the government’s majority depends – appear to think those “deeper” customs arrangements, involving additional checks on livestock and food crossing the Irish Sea, breach their red lines on identical treatment for Northern Ireland. For its part, Labour has said the agreement looks unlikely to support jobs and the economy or guarantee standards and protections, and it is therefore preparing to vote against it. More Tory remainers – heartened by Jo Johnson’s resignation last week – may also be encouraged to rebel. The EU has confirmed an emergency EU summit can be called for 25 November to seal the deal, although events in the UK may intervene. Complicating the question, some EU member states feel the deal makes too many concessions to the UK. In principle, the deal then has to pass through parliament early in December. Many think it could fall at this hurdle, resulting either in a challenge to May’s leadership, a general election or even a second referendum (with staying in the EU still theoretically an option, although that would mean extending article 50, which set the deadline for the UK to leave as 29 March 2019). But even if May and her deal survive, which appears increasingly unlikely, the agreement stipulates that the government must decide before June 2020 whether it wants to extend the transition period, fall into the Northern Ireland backstop arrangement or enter a permanent customs union – all options that would be anathema to Brexiters. After that, of course, it has to seal the future trade deal, on which the two sides remain far apart. Britain’s Brexit battle is a long way – a very long way – from over.
Brexiters will find many contentious clauses difficult to stomach within the 585-page draft document  • May takes draft Brexit deal to parliament – live updates   The 585-page draft withdrawal agreement negotiated between the European Union and the United Kingdom contains several highly contentious points that supporters of Brexit in particular will find hard to stomach. Here are some of the points that may cause problems for the prime minister, Theresa May, in parliament: The draft Brexit agreement says both parties will “use their best endeavours” to have a future trade agreement concluded six months before the end of the transition period in December 2020, but that if this is not the case the EU and the UK could “jointly extend the transition period” for an unspecified period. Otherwise the backstop solution for Ireland and Northern Ireland aimed at preventing a hard border would come into force. The backstop, consisting of “a single customs territory between the Union and the United Kingdom”, will apply from the end of the transition period “unless and until ... a subsequent agreement becomes applicable”. The single customs territory would cover all goods except fishery products, the agreement says, and will “include the corresponding level playing field commitments and appropriate enforcement mechanisms to ensure fair competition between the EU27 and the UK”. There would necessarily be extra non-customs checks on some types of goods passing between Northern Ireland and the rest of the UK, which will not please the Democratic Unionist party who have consistently opposed any kind of differential treatment for Northern Ireland. On exiting the backstop, the agreement says that if “either side considers the the backstop is no longer necessary, it can notify the other” setting out its reasons. A joint committee must then meet within six months, and both sides must agree jointly to end the backstop. This part of the agreement would be difficult for Brexiters to swallow. They have consistently argued that Britain must be able to exit any all-UK customs union as and when it wants to be able to pursue free-trade deals around the world. The agreement says that under the backstop arrangement the UK must observe “level playing field” commitments on competition and state aid, as well as employment and environment standards and tax. These measures are intended to ensure that UK businesses are not able to undercut EU industry. Brussels has demanded “dynamic alignment” on state aid, which would oblige the UK parliament to simply cut and paste EU regulations as they are issued. Britain must also transfer three EU tax directives into law – on the exchange of tax information, reporting on investment firms and the EU’s code of conduct on taxation. “Non-regression clauses” will also prevent the UK from bringing in lower standards on social, environmental and labour regulations such as working hours. Many of these requirements would also be anathema to Conservative Brexiters, for whom leaving the EU represented an opportunity to head towards a low-tax, light-regulation economy such as that seen in Singapore. This issue may be even more depressing for Brexiters. The future UK-EU relationship, which both sides have said requires much more work but aims to achieve a close relationship on services (including financial services) and investment as well as sectoral cooperation in, for example, transport, would “build on the single customs territory provided for in the withdrawal agreement”. The EU has repeatedly said that it would only allow British seafood exporters tariff- and quota-free access to EU markets in exchange for a reciprocal agreement that EU fishing fleets can continue to operate in British waters. This potentially explosive issue appears to have been kicked down the road: the withdrawal agreement essentially says only that the EU would apply tariffs on fish until a separate agreement was struck on access to EU fishing in UK waters. After the transition period ends, the final withdrawal agreement would be policed by a structure based on a joint committee taking decisions by mutual consent and whose verdicts would be binding. A five-member arbitration panel would be convened to manage disputes. Any issue relating to EU law, however, cannot be decided by the arbitration panel but must go before the European court of justice. That, too, would annoy Brexiters wanting to “take back control of our laws”. In another potentially controversial clause, the draft agreement gives London’s financial centre only a basic level of access to the EU’s markets similar to that enjoyed by US and Japanese firms. It would be based on the EU’s existing system of financial market access known as equivalence – a watered-down relationship that Brussels has said all along was the best arrangement that Britain can expect.
Prime minister holds press conference after resignations and tough questions from MPs in the Commons    We’re going to close down this live blog now. Thanks for reading. Here’s a summary of the evening’s events: For a summary of Theresa May’s speech from earlier this afternoon, read here. And you can read the full round-up of the day’s political news here:  The former government minister, James Duddridge, suggests the number of letters required to trigger a vote may already have been reached as the Tory MP, Adam Holloway, becomes the latest to submit one. Duddridge, who sent in his own call to the 1922 Committee chairman, Graham Brady, during the Tory conference in October, said: I think I recall Brady said he will give the PM 48 hours notice before going public. We may have hit the 48 letters but no announcement. Holloway announced he has submitted his letter calling for a no-confidence vote on his Facebook page this evening. Updated  Here’s a look at some of tomorrow’s front pages – most of which, as one might imagine, lead on the Brexit story. The Guardian is among those to note that, despite the forces of all political colours now arrayed against her, May fights on: Guardian front page, Friday 16 November 2018: Resignations, a coup and a day of hostility. But May fights on pic.twitter.com/zDycxDfGUY It is perhaps revelatory that papers that usually have opposing viewpoints, particularly on Brexit, follow a similar line. They include the Times and the Financial Times, as well as the Daily Telegraph and the Daily Express: Friday’s TIMES: “Lonely May staggers on” #bbcpapers #tomorrowspaperstoday pic.twitter.com/AIqyFOqN1N Friday’s FINANCIAL TIMES: “May defiant as draft deal threatens Tory civil war” #bbcpapers #tomorrowspaperstoday pic.twitter.com/IqSn2BL2p9 Friday’s Daily TELEGRAPH: “Am I going to see this through? Yes, I am” #bbcpapers #tomorrowspaperstoday pic.twitter.com/WNuWJw4Gsj Friday’s Daily EXPRESS: “Defiant May: I’ll Fight To The End” #bbcpapers #tomorrowspaperstoday pic.twitter.com/k1SGA4JGgv Perhaps most notable is that the Daily Mail, under new management of course, which goes yet further. It attacks the hard Brexiters to whom it used to hand so much positive coverage, who it now accuses of denouncing May’s deal without offering a viable alternative. Moreover, it says that – beyond a hard Brexit and no Brexit at all – there is no viable alternative: Friday’s Daily MAIL: “Have They Lost The Plot?” #bbcpapers #tomorrowspaperstoday pic.twitter.com/EjaP0HwEtg In a not-dissimilar vein, the I paper and Metro focus on the fire May is come under from her own side: Friday’s i - “Plotters move in on the PM” #bbcpapers #tomorrowspaperstoday pic.twitter.com/VKLrGTi3Ii Friday’s METRO: “Blue On Blue” #bbcpapers #tomorrowspaperstoday pic.twitter.com/vHVBMygT1L While the Daily Mirror and City AM both lead on the prime minister’s cricketing sign-off at this afternoon’s press conference: Friday’s Daily MIRROR: “Stumped” #bbcpapers #tomorrowspaperstoday pic.twitter.com/N3C6dcFhNx Friday’s CITY A.M. - “Not Out” #bbcpapers #tomorrowspaperstoday pic.twitter.com/M5kI3RVSKw And finally, some might suggest the only paper to get it right is the Daily Star, which leads on a story about Holly Willoughby – giving the day’s Brexit news no more than a bottom corner slot: Friday’s Daily STAR: “Holly Wobbles” #bbcpapers #tomorrowspaperstoday pic.twitter.com/jN883Sy4ll  Theresa May has met Gibraltar’s chief minister, Fabian Picardo, at Downing Street to discuss the Brexit plan this evening. A Downing Street spokesman has said: They commended the hard work of negotiating teams and the constructive discussions that have taken place with Spain and the European Union to ensure that important mutual interests are protected, and new opportunities are enabled for all. In particular, the prime minister and chief minister welcomed the conclusion of a protocol on Gibraltar that forms an integral part of the draft withdrawal agreement and will provide certainty to citizens and businesses in Gibraltar and the surrounding area. The leaders agreed that these arrangements reflected the determination of all parties to move forward in a spirit of dialogue and cooperation.  David Pegg Two leading Brexiter MPs, David Davis and Owen Paterson, have attacked Theresa May’s proposed EU withdrawal agreement at an event in Washington DC. Davis, the former Brexit secretary, said the withdrawal agreement proposed by the prime minister was “a very poor deal”, while Paterson said it was “so bad it cannot be allowed to proceed.” Speaking at the Heritage Foundation, a neoconservative thinktank, the men – who were joined by Shanker Singham of the rightwing Institute for Economic Affairs thinktank – complained that the deal effectively prevented the UK from having an independent trade policy and striking trade deals with other countries. “This is the greatest tragedy of this deal: it takes a country that could have been a major player in solving global problems, and it makes it completely irrelevant,” said Singham. Davis predicted that May’s deal would be voted down by parliament, and that the UK would then have to return to EU negotiators and request further concessions. Both Davis and Paterson said leaving without any deal would be preferable to parliament agreeing to May’s proposal. Davis conceded that “there may be a hiccup or two in the first year if we have a no deal outcome”, but argued that the EU would rapidly agree a free trade deal with the UK because it would be in both countries’ interests to do so. The former Brexit secretary has previously predicted incorrectly that the UK would rapidly agree a series of free trade deals following Brexit.  A report suggests the arch-Brexiter, Michael Gove, has turned down the Brexit secretary job. It had been said his price for taking it would have been renegotiation of the draft agreement. Source close to Michael Gove confirms he has rejected brexit Secretary jobAs expected, but now all eyes on whether he quits government altogether since he clearly can’t really support her deal Gove is currently the environment secretary.  It appears Penny Mordaunt’s support for a free vote on the Brexit deal is being briefed out in Westminster this evening: Penny Mordaunt still Development secretary tonight after meeting with PM.She is pushing the idea of a free vote for Parliament for the meaningful vote with Number 10.Believes it will take the wind out of the sails of a second referendum. So,...update - Penny Mordaunt not going anywhere tonight, she's still pushing for this idea of a free vote on final Brexit deal - what's interesting is that she discussed that with the PM, but also the Cabinet Secretary I understand Penny Mourdant met with the PM tonight to push her to allow a free vote on the Brexit deal. One source says the idea is "gaining traction" with MPs and ministers.  The Welsh secretary, Alun Cairns, has warned pro-Brexit Conservative backbenchers they run the risk of leaving the UK within the EU if they oppose Theresa May’s plan. The international trade secretary, Liam Fox, who appeared at an event alongside Cairns this evening, refused to speak to journalists after earlier batting away suggestions he might resign over the draft EU withdrawal agreement. The two ministers hosted a Board of Trade meeting at Swansea University, during which Cairns said the government’s lack of a Commons majority meant any successor to May would find it equally hard to satisfy all parties. He added: Changing the prime minister doesn’t change the arithmetic of parliament. So, therefore, colleagues need to accept the context in which we’re working. I would say to the hardliner Leavers who want to leave without a deal that they run the risk of not having a Brexit. And I would say to the ones who are Remainers who want to ignore the outcome of the referendum that they’re running the risk of leaving without a deal, which is the worst that each side would want. Cairns admitted the draft agreement was a “compromise”, and described the “backstop” plan to prevent a hard border in Ireland as a “negative” aspect.  My colleague, David Pegg, is keeping an eye on the Heritage Foundation’s Brexit conference, where two Brexit-supporting former government ministers – David Davis and Owen Paterson – have been among those offering their thoughts: Davis on May's proposal: "It's a very bad deal... it's a very poor deal." Lists several complaints, including threatening the union, potentially going on forever. Paterson: "It's so bad it cannot be allowed to proceed.." Paterson claims we can emerge from "behind the wall" and take our place on all sorts of world bodies. I have no idea what he means by this; the UK is already represented on all sorts of world bodies. Claims we could be in it forever, and that it will be very expensive. Davis: "We are absolutely shutting ourselves off from our best future, and that includes with the US." Davis: Very likely May's deal will be defeated in parliament. Gardiner: What happens next? Davis: "We need to go back and reset it." Says the UK would go back to the EU and demand concessions. Davis now applauding Singham's proposal 'Plan A+' of opening negotiations with other countries. "If we do that and have something ready to go, I think we can bring them back to the table." Paterson: "I'm not alarmed by world trade terms" because it would be better than now. Paterson: "Borders are tax points, they're not inspection points."... "If we can get rid of this awful proposal, we can get on with what we're proposing." Davis: "There may be a hiccup or two in the first year if we have a no deal outcome" but they'll be resolved quickly because is it's in everyone interests. Says the EU will quickly negotiate a free trade deal. It would almost be too obvious to point out that Davis has previously predicted trade deals will be struck with incredible ease, so perhaps take that point with a vat of salt.  There has been some talk in Westminster about Michael Gove’s whereabouts but my colleague, Heather Stewart, has this: Downing Street now not expecting any more news tonight. Fresh appointments - of a Brexit secretary, for example - looking unlikely until the morning.  Here’s the full text of Corbyn’s email to Labour members (emphasis his): The government is falling apart before our eyes. Their half-baked deal has unravelled, the prime minister has lost all authority and is clearly incapable of delivering a Brexit deal that commands even the support of her Cabinet - let alone parliament and the people of our country. Our party conference agreed that this deal would be judged against our six tests, and if it failed to meet them we would vote against it. After two years of bungled negotiations, the government has produced a botched deal that breaches the prime minister’s own red lines, does not meet our six tests and will leave the country in an indefinite halfway house without a real say. As I said in parliament earlier today, people around the country will be feeling anxious about the industries they work in, the jobs they hold and the stability of this country. We do not accept that the choice is between the government’s deal and ‘no deal’. We will work across parliament to stop a ‘no deal’ outcome. Labour has set out our alternative plan for a sensible Brexit that would work for all of our nations and regions, bring parliament and the country together, support jobs and our economy and guarantee rights, standards and protections. If parliament votes down this shambolic Tory deal – as seems likely – this will represent a loss of confidence in the government. In those circumstances, the best outcome for the country is an immediate general election that can sweep the Tories from power and deliver the Labour government this country desperately needs. If we cannot get a general election, in line with our conference policy, we will support all options remaining on the table, including campaigning for a public vote. We are ready to lead, ready to deliver a sensible deal that works for all our regions and nations and ready to build a Britain that works for the many, not the few. Jeremy CorbynLeader of the Labour Party  The Labour leader, Jeremy Corbyn, has written to party members this evening, talking up the possibility of a general election if Theresa May cannot get her deal through parliament – “as seems likely”. And one line stands out in particular: If we cannot get a general election, in line with our conference policy, we will support all options remaining on the table, including campaigning for a public vote. So, Corbyn is being explicit with members: He will back another referendum if he cannot force a general election. Now, that was clearly the case at conference this autumn – as Corbyn rightly points out in his email. But there were some concerns among remain-supporting Labour members about whether or not he really did back that after he told Der Speigel at the weekend that “we can’t stop” Brexit.  The rumour mill had suggested Penny Mordaunt, the international development secretary, was considering resigning. So, her arrival at Number 10 shortly after the prime minister’s press conference caused some eyebrows to be raised in expectation. No need, according to the Daily Telegraph’s chief political correspondent, Christopher Hope: Penny Mordaunt has just left 10 Downing Street in a Government car, suggesting she has not resigned. #BrexitChaos Updated  The Lib Dems, perhaps unsurprisingly, are giving short shrift to Theresa May’s defence of her Brexit plan this evening. The party’s leader, Vince Cable, says: The prime minister took a long time to say nothing this afternoon. She appears to be in denial. The facts haven’t changed. There is no majority in Parliament for her deal, and she has rightly conceded that ‘No Brexit’ is the real alternative to it. There must now be a people’s vote to break the deadlock and get the country out of this mess. Updated  Andrew Sparrow Little known fact about Theresa May; she has an exceptionally good memory. She can “read a full statement and repeat it almost verbatim”, Philip Cowley and Dennis Kavanagh write in their definitive account of the 2017 general election. “As one of her team noted: ‘She reads it through once, it’s an almost photographic memory. And I mean word-for-word, not paraphrasing.’” You saw that in action today. There were at least two lines that May used in her answers that sounded pre-scripted, and that she used twice. First, there was: “Am I going to see this through? Yes.” And then there was the spiel how she would be doing her job (negotiating a Brexit deal) and that after that it would be up to MPs to do their job (pass the wretched thing). As news lines, these don’t really take us us very far. The first is little more than a slogan, although at least it quashes, for the moment, any speculation that May is going to stand down. The second sheds a bit more light on the strategy she might use to get her deal through parliament; MPs will be told it is their national duty to approve the deal, with the implication that if they vote it down, they will be held responsible for the catastrophe that will follow.  What is curious about May, and probably a huge weakness, is her reluctance to take on the arguments of her opponents. She made a modest attempt to explain the need in the Brexit process to accept difficult compromises. But on a day when her Brexiter opponents have been dominating the airwaves, she made no attempt to berate them for the multiple fake promises they made during the EU referendum campaign, despite being given an open invitation to do so. (See 5.35pm.) You can’t win an argument unless you’re willing to tell your opponents they’re wrong. But she won’t. It is as if somehow she has internalised the Brexiter mindset. What rescued the press conference was her Geoffrey Boycott answer to the final question, which she delivered so well that it could have been staged (although I don’t think it was.) (See 5.52pm.) It made for polished TV, and was about as good a clip as May has ever delivered. But it is still just a slogan. To get Brexit through the Commons, she will need a lot more than that. That’s all from me for today. My colleague Kevin Rawlinson is now taking over. Updated  This is from the BBC’s Laura Kuenssberg. I m told Gove has had a meeting with the PM - if he had accepted the job as Brexit sec I think we would know by now - if he hasn’t ... can’t help thinking that means he might v well be off  Q: You are a cricket fan. How many wickets need to fall in your cabinet before your walk? May says one of her cricket heroes was Geoffrey Boycott.  And what do you know about Geoffrey Boycott? Geoffrey Boycott stuck to it. And he got the runs in the end.
The EU has agreed on May’s 585-page withdrawal agreement. Here are the main issues• Brexit summit - latest news and reaction - live!   After 524 days of negotiations, Theresa May and the EU’s other 27 heads of state and government have agreed a deal to be put in front of the UK and European parliaments for ratification ahead of Britain’s withdrawal on 29 March 2019. There is a 585-page withdrawal agreement, which will form the basis of a legally binding treaty, and a 26-page political declaration on the future relationship. The second document does not have legal force, but it politically binds both sides to some basic parameters in the future talks. Here is what has been agreed in Brussels: If MPs reject the deal, there are seven possible paths the country could go down next. May brings it back to MPsPerhaps with minor tweaks after a dash to Brussels. ​MPs knuckle under and vote it through. May resigns immediatelyIt is hard to imagine her surviving for long. After a rapid leadership contest, a different leader could appeal to a majority in parliament, perhaps by offering a softer deal. Tory backbenchers depose herJacob Rees-Mogg gets his way and there is a no-confidence vote. A new leader then tries to assemble a majority behind a tweaked deal. May calls a general electionMay could choose to take the ultimate gamble and hope that voters would back her deal, over the heads of squabbling MPs. Labour tries to force an electionThe opposition tables a vote of no confidence. ​If May lost​, the opposition (or a new Conservative leader) would have two weeks to form an alternative government that could win a second confidence vote. If they were unable to do so, a general election would be triggered. A second referendum gathers supportThis is most likely if Labour makes a last-ditch decision to back it.  No dealThe EU (Withdrawal) Act specifies 29 March 2019 as Brexit day. Amber Rudd has said she believes parliament would stop a no deal, but it is not clear how it would do so. The three main issues dealt with in the withdrawal agreement are citizens rights, the £39bn divorce deal and the problem of avoiding a border on the island of Ireland after Brexit. Citizens’ rightsThe deal safeguards the rights for more than 3 million EU citizens in the UK, and over 1 million UK nationals in EU countries to stay and continue their current activities in the place in which they have made their home. Theresa May had sought to limit the scope of the deal to those who arrived in the UK before 29 March 2019, but she lost out. All those arriving to live in the UK at any point up until the end of the transition period, which could last until the end of 2022 should it be extended, will enjoy the rights that EU nationals have today to make Britain their home, to live, work and study. Divorce billIt had been feared that the UK’s exit bill could scupper the negotiations. David Davis, the former Brexit secretary, told the European commission president, Jean-Claude Juncker, early on in the talks that there was nothing in the EU’s treaties to suggest that the British government owed any money. Juncker responded that the EU was “not a golf club”, and that Britain would have to come good on the spending commitments it made as a member state. Huge figures circulated, with some totting up gross liabilities to be £100bn. That prompted the then foreign secretary, Boris Johnson, to suggest Brussels could “go whistle” for its money. An agreement was finally made last November that the UK would stump up about £39bn, to cover its contribution to the EU budget until 2020, and accumulated other outstanding commitments such as pensions for EU officials. Irish borderThis has turned out to be the thorniest issue to settle in the Brexit divorce agreement and still causes the most unhappiness among Theresa May’s critics. The UK had initially proposed a technological solution but this was rebuffed by Ireland and EU officials as “magical thinking”. The EU initially proposed that Northern Ireland should in effect stay in the single market and customs union, prompting a furious response from the British prime minister. The EU moved its position. The core of the solution is the so-called backstop, an insurance plan that kicks in if future trade talks fail to avoid a hard border on the island of Ireland. The backstop means the whole of the UK will remain in the EU customs union, while Northern Ireland will have to follow single market rules. Brexit supporters loathe the backstop, fearing it will leave the UK “shackled” to EU rules. Wary EU countries think the plan benefits the UK, so insisted the UK respect EU social and environmental rules to to avoid undercutting their companies. The UK came into the negotiations determined to get a weighty political declaration that would easily translate into a full-blown trade deal ready to come into force soon after Brexit day. The promise of the “easiest trade deal in history” soon hit the buffers. The UK has agreed a joint paper of just 26 pages outlining the parameters of the future relationship, with the two main pillars being trade and security. The paper offers lots of ideas about what might happen, but few concrete plans. Trade and the cityThe prime minister’s central policy priority in terms of trade was to secure a commitment to frictionless trade in goods through a common rulebook, the centrepiece of the Chequers plan. By stating that the UK and the EU would be “separate markets and distinct legal orders” after Brexit, the political declaration demolished it. British access to European markets will depend on the UK respecting EU standards on competition, tax, environment, as well as social and employment protection, but it is not clear whether that involves non-regression or dynamic alignment. The political declaration says the shared customs territory in the Northern Ireland backstop will be built on and improved in a future trade deal. The UK, bafflingly, insists this does not bind the British government to a customs union. Despite British demands for a bespoke deal on financial services, the UK will be treated like any other non-EU country. Instead of “passports” that allow the City of London to operate across the EU, bankers and traders will have to rely on “equivalence”, allowing market access to be withdrawn by Brussels at 30 days’ notice. There is a commitment to complete equivalence assessments by the middle of June 2020. Foreign and security policyThe UK had hoped to not only maintain the current level of security and police cooperation but to even opt in to aspects of the EU’s structures that it had previously snubbed. That prompted Luxembourg’s prime minister, Xavier Bettel, to remark: “They were in with a load of opt-outs. Now they are out, and want a load of opt-ins.” The EU is only offering cooperation, rather than membership, of EU police agency Europol and judicial cooperation agency Eurojust. Despite its previous disdain for EU-level defence cooperation, Britain has negotiated clauses that will allow it to participate in EU joint defence projects. A major row during the Brexit negotiations was the European commission’s insistence that the UK defence industries would not be allowed to work on the most sensitive parts the EU’s £8bn Galileo satellite programme, to which British taxpayers have already paid £1bn. The UK has threatened to walk away and build its own satellite. The political declaration, in an example of its many vague clauses, limits its solution to 10 words. “The parties should consider appropriate arrangements for cooperation on space”, it says.
Shahmir Sanni lost job and was falsely vilified as a fantasist and liar after revelations about Vote Leave spending   The rightwing pressure group the TaxPayers’ Alliance has conceded that it illegally sacked the whistleblower Shahmir Sanni for revealing unlawful overspending in the Brexit referendum campaign, in a case that could have a major impact on how lobbyists are described in the media. In a development that lawyers have described as “almost unprecedented”, the group has also conceded that it illegally vilified Sanni in the media in coordination with a network of other “linked” organisations. The alliance has accepted all the allegations Sanni made during his action claiming unfair dismissal, wrongful dismissal, direct discrimination and “dismissal by reason of a philosophical belief in the sanctity of British democracy”. Significantly, it has also conceded that it is liable for what Sanni’s lawyer, Peter Daly of Bindmans, describes as “extreme public vilification”. Sanni had claimed that it was responsible for a smear attack published by the website Brexit Central, and that it coordinated “derogatory statements” made by the head of Vote Leave, Matthew Elliott, to the media – calling Sanni a “fantasist” (Channel 4) and “so-called whistleblower” (BBC) and claiming that he was guilty of “completely lying” (Sky News)– before an official finding by the Electoral Commission into the conduct of the Brexit referendum. The disclosure is likely to have far-reaching consequences for the way that broadcasters describe lobby groups. The uncontested claim has stated that the TaxPayers’ Alliance is responsible for Elliott’s Brexit Central website as part of nine “linked” high-profile rightwing “thinktanks” that operate in and around offices at 55 Tufton Street in Westminster and coordinate media and other strategy. [See footnote.] In Sanni’s case, they also coordinated with Downing Street. The network includes the Adam Smith Institute, the Centre for Policy Studies, the Institute of Economic Affairs and Leave Means Leave. The shadow chancellor, John McDonnell, is calling for a full inquiry into the groups’ funding and said that in the interests of “openness and accountability” the BBC must make clear they are lobbyists, not thinktanks” as they are sometimes referred to. In March, Sanni revealed to the Observer massive overspending by the official Vote Leave campaign, which has now been found to be in breach of the law by the Electoral Commission. The day before this was published, Downing Street released a statement that revealed Sanni was gay, and the TaxPayers’ Alliance subsequently sacked him from his job running its social media. It has now conceded in full Sanni’s claims and is liable to pay substantial damages. Details of the alliance’s relationship with Downing Street and the role of Stephen Parkinson, Theresa May’s political secretary, will now not be heard in court. A separate claim by Sanni against Downing Street is still ongoing. Sanni, who received an award from Gay Times last week, said: “It has proved that the TaxPayers’ Alliance sacked me for speaking the truth. And that there has been a coordinated effort by the Conservative establishment, including the government, to shut me down. “The TPA claimed to have lost a donor because of my actions. If they had fought the case in court as we wanted, they would have had to reveal who their donors are. That they were prepared to admit their illegal behaviour on all counts shows how far they are willing to go to protect this information. “Serious questions must be asked about who is funding them, what their exact relationship is with the government and why are they allowed a platform on national television.” Chris Milsom, a barrister who specialises in whistleblowing cases, said: “It is incredibly unusual for a respondent to make a complete concession on liability as the respondent has here. To wave a white flag to avoid disclosing documents and giving evidence in court is really unusual. They conceded everything. How does an ostensibly private company come to be working with Downing Street? What is their relationship? Who are their funders? “If this had been fully ventilated in a public trial we could have found these things out. The effect of these admissions, however, is that Mr Sanni was dismissed both because he blew the whistle on electoral crimes and because of his philosophical belief in the sanctity of democracy. We must now ask: is that an entity that is fit to be on the BBC ostensibly speaking on behalf of all ‘taxpayers’?” McDonnell said: “We need full transparency in who is operating in our political system and therefore seeking to influence both our elections but also our governmental policymaking. These organisations – even by their names – seek to portray themselves as independent, authoritative research bodies.” In reality, he said, they were “virtual lobbyists” but never presented as such by the BBC and others. At the time of publication, the TaxPayers’ Alliance had not responded to the Observer’s request for comment. • Note added 16 November 2018, updated 21 and 27 November: Only Sanni and the TaxPayers’ Alliance were parties to Sanni’s unfair dismissal claim. BrexitCentral, the Institute of Economic Affairs, the Adam Smith Institute and the Centre for Policy Studies each made contact after publication of this article to deny that they had coordinated to vilify Sanni. Jonathan Isaby, editor of the BrexitCentral website, emailed that the TaxPayers’ Alliance was not responsible for BrexitCentral, and that BrexitCentral’s article about Sanni had been a forensic examination of his claims. A spokesperson for the Institute of Economic Affairs emailed that the IEA was an independent educational charity not a lobbying body. • This article was amended on 13 and 16 November 2018 to clarify the media outlets on which three quoted comments critical of Sanni were made.
Prime minister to make statement to MPs as pound falls to lowest level in 18 months   Theresa May has postponed the final vote on her Brexit deal after a last-minute conference call with cabinet ministers, a clear admission by the prime minister that she does not believe she can get the unpopular EU withdrawal agreement through the Commons. The drastic move, as May faced defeat by up to 100 of her own MPs, is a humiliation for the prime minister, whose aides and cabinet ministers had emphatically denied there was any prospect of pulling the vote, even as late as Monday morning. Advisers, ministers and loyalist MPs had been urging May to delay Tuesday’s vote in order to seek new assurances from Brussels and avoid the chaos of a parliamentary defeat. May is expected to confirm the vote has been delayed in an oral statement to the House of Commons at 3.30pm. It will be immediately followed by a business statement from the leader of the House of Commons, Andrea Leadsom, implying that she will confirm the procedural details of the postponement. The vote could take place next week or even be delayed until early January, although this would allow less time for the ensuing Brexit legislation to be passed through parliament before 29 March. The ultimate deadline for the vote is 21 January. News of the delay caused the pound to tumble to its lowest level in 18 months. The prime minister spoke to cabinet colleagues on Monday morning in a hastily arranged conference call, after apparently concluding she could not win over enough of the 100 Tory MPs who had said they were against the deal. Before that call, a cabinet source said they believed ministers would back the decision to delay the vote, but added: “She needs to have a bloody good plan B.” The children’s minister, Nadhim Zahawi, said on Twitter that May had “listened to colleagues” and would now “head to Brussels to push back on the backstop”. Olly Robbins, the prime minister’s Brexit negotiator, arrived in Brussels on Monday. EU sources said Downing Street was seeking extra safeguards that the “backstop” solution in the withdrawal agreement would never be triggered. A backstop is required to ensure there is no hard border in Ireland if a comprehensive free trade deal cannot be signed before the end of 2020. Theresa May has proposed to the EU that the whole of the UK would remain in the customs union after Brexit, but Brussels has said it needs more time to evaluate the proposal.  As a result, the EU insists on having its own backstop - the backstop to the backstop - which would mean Northern Ireland would remain in the single market and customs union in the absence of a free trade deal, prompting fierce objections from Conservative hard Brexiters and the DUP, which props up her government.  That prompted May to propose a country-wide alternative in which the whole of the UK would remain in parts of the customs union after Brexit.  “The EU still requires a ‘backstop to the backstop’ – effectively an insurance policy for the insurance policy. And they want this to be the Northern Ireland-only solution that they had previously proposed,” May told MPs.  Raising the stakes, the prime minister said the EU’s insistence amounted to a threat to the constitution of the UK: “We have been clear that we cannot agree to anything that threatens the integrity of our United Kingdom,” she added. The prime minister conducted a frantic round of telephone diplomacy over the weekend, speaking to Angela Merkel and Mark Rutte, the leaders of Germany and the Netherlands respectively, Downing Street confirmed. She had also spoken to the Irish taoiseach, Leo Varadkar; the president of the European commission, Jean-Claude Juncker; and the president of the European council, Donald Tusk. EU officials insisted the best they could offer would be “clarifications” of the withdrawal agreement, rather than reopening the text. The 585-page document states that both sides will make “best endeavours” towards negotiating a trade deal to ensure there is no need for the backstop – an all-UK customs union that would act as a guarantee against a hard border on the island of Ireland. Earlier on Monday, a commission spokesman told reporters in Brussels: “This deal is the best and only deal possible. We will not renegotiate the deal that is on the table right now. That is very clear. “Our position has therefore not changed and as far as we’re concerned the UK is leaving the EU on the 29 March 2019. We are prepared for all scenarios.” That view was echoed by Varadkar, who told reporters it was not possible to renegotiate the backstop: “The reason we’ve ended up in the solution we have is because of the red lines the UK itself laid down.” He said he would not object to the issuing of statements clarifying the meaning of the agreement, but cautioned that no clarification could go against what had already been agreed. Guy Verhofstadt, the European parliament’s Brexit coordinator, tweeted: “I can’t follow anymore. After two years of negotiations, the Tory government wants to delay the vote. Just keep in mind that we will never let the Irish down. This delay will further aggravate the uncertainty for people and businesses. It’s time to make up their mind.” Jeremy Corbyn described the delay as a “desperate step”. “We have known for at least two weeks that Theresa May’s worst-of-all-worlds deal was going to be rejected by parliament because it is damaging for Britain.” Angry Tory rebels and Labour MPs said they would try to force the government to hold a vote, even though a government source said there would be no vote on a business motion to cancel Tuesday’s vote. “We are replacing the business with a new statement but it isn’t a motion and therefore isn’t votable,” the source said. Steve Baker, one of the leaders of the Conservative hard Brexit European Research Group, said the postponement was “essentially a defeat” of May’s Brexit deal. Recalling the prime minister’s general election slogan, the rebel MP added: “The terms of the WA [withdrawal agreement] were so bad that they didn’t dare put it to parliament for a vote. This isn’t the mark of a stable government or a strong plan.” Downing Street and key ministers had repeatedly said the vote would not be delayed, in an attempt to concentrate the minds of MPs. Earlier on Monday morning, Michael Gove categorically stated the vote would go ahead. Asked on BBC Radio 4’s Today programme if the vote was “definitely, 100%” going to happen, the environment secretary replied: “Yes”. Pressed on the point, he said: “The vote is going ahead.”
Nearly 90% of party members would opt to stay in the EU in a ‘people’s vote’, finds survey   Labour members are significantly more opposed to Brexit than Jeremy Corbyn is, with 72% of them thinking their leader should fully support a second referendum, according to a study of attitudes in the party. The polling, part of an ongoing wider academic study into attitudes in various parties, found that only 18% opposed Labour campaigning for a second referendum, while 88% would then opt for remain if such a vote was held. Official Labour policy is that a second referendum could potentially be considered if there is not a general election. However, Corbyn is publicly lukewarm on the idea, and prompted dismay among some party activists last month by saying he expected Brexit to happen even if Labour won a snap election. Corbyn is facing intense pressure from some in the party to change course, with one pro-remain party group pushing for a motion that Labour would guarantee a referendum if there was a general election. The study, part of the Party Members Project led by Prof Tim Bale of Queen Mary University of London, found that while Labour members still strongly supported their leader overall, they appear both distanced from his views on Brexit and, for some, sceptical about his motives on the subject. The polling of 1,034 party members shortly before Christmas found that almost two-thirds believed Corbyn was doing very well or fairly well as leader, and 58% believe he could get a better Brexit deal than Theresa May as prime minister. But asked why they felt Corbyn had not campaigned for a second referendum, 23% of those asked said it was because the Labour leader backed leaving the EU. Another 34% put the decision down to not wanting to alienate Labour voters. If a new referendum was held, 88% of members would back remain, both in a two-way vote against either May’s plan or no deal, or in a three-way poll between all of them. The findings “increase the pressure on Labour’s leader to get off the fence”, Bale said. “If Jeremy Corbyn genuinely believes, as he has repeatedly claimed, that the Labour party’s policy should reflect the wishes of its members rather than just its leaders, then he arguably has a funny way of showing it – at least when it comes to Brexit,” he said. There was, he noted, some difference between the views of Labour voters and members. While a parallel poll of 1,675 voters found 73% of the party’s supporters believed the Brexit decision was a mistake, for members that rises to 89%. On the impact of a no-deal departure, 89% of members said this would harm the economy in the medium to long term, against 65% of current Labour voters and 45% of all voters. Of the near-third of members who said they oppose Labour’s current Brexit policy, 56% said the issue could make them quit the party – a potential loss of 88,000 people. Bale said Corbyn “does need to think carefully about whether his ambiguity on the issue is quite as cunningly clever as many commentators seem to believe”. He added: “It is because, if Corbyn carries on like this, then Labour risks losing some of the members on whom it’s relying to give it the activist edge over the Conservatives at the next general election.” A Labour spokesman said: “As unanimously agreed at Labour party conference, if Theresa May’s botched Brexit deal is voted down in parliament then a general election should be called. In line with the policy agreed at conference, if the Conservatives block a general election then we will keep all options on the table, including the option of campaigning for a public vote.”
 What cowardice. She roused the country to the great climax of Tuesday’s parliamentary vote on her EU withdrawal deal, only to beat a retreat – yet another fateful error in Theresa May’s miserable, blundering leadership. This vote was set to be the cathartic moment when the country finally faced the Brexit truth. The cataclysmic collapse of May’s deal would have wiped the slate clean for her, for every MP and every party, freeing everyone to think again. Yes, hers was the only deal possible – but only if she was right that the nation’s ultimate uncrossable red line really is stopping immigration and free movement. If closing our borders is non-negotiable then hers was the only deal, whoever was prime minister. But that deal was set for a parliamentary defeat no government had suffered in living memory, with public opinion overwhelmingly against. Never mind her personal fate – leave political obituaries for another day. The country has to ask whether curbing EU immigration still matters above all else. If so, then the only other option is crashing out with no deal, whoever is leader. But a no-deal crash is so dangerous, the great majority of MPs will absolutely reject inflicting an 8% fall in living standards, blocked ports, empty supermarket shelves, medicine supply failures and the pound falling through the floor – it even slumped on news of this postponement. As it plunged, the madness of the ultras was captured by John Redwood telling Bloomberg TV not to worry, as a no deal saves the £39bn divorce fee: “We won’t be crashing out, we’ll be cashing in.” Most MPs of all parties will refuse to underwrite such an act of suicidal idiocy. As the Tory axemen sharpen up to decapitate their leader, the rest of us must sincerely hope she survives. She may be our most inept prime minister in living memory, apart from David Cameron who caused this mayhem, but far worse beckons, whoever replaces her. If 48 Tory MPs send in their letters, and 158 or more of them vote to oust her, we should fear the even worse leader their party will elect instead. Whatever their original EU stance, the winner will have campaigned for the votes of the ageing Brexity shire members of their small party, each contender out-Brexiting the rest with harder pledges. Some – Boris Johnson, certainly – will promise to crash out, and that may get him anointed. Others will promise undeliverable unicorn deals, cake-eating, cherry-picking, that can only lead to the identical crisis May faced once she found her red lines made any deal with the EU impossible. Pray she stays: after all her errors, she at least now knows some basic EU truths. Off she goes to Brussels to pretend some cosmetic rejigging will solve the Irish border backstop, though the taoiseach, Leo Varadkar, said on Monday that it was not possible. If the EU gave way, Varadkar’s government would fall. Of course Brussels will rightly favour supporting him over propping up Britain’s disgraceful Brexit government. An election is improbable but not impossible – though Jeremy Corbyn stands accused of failing to call a confidence vote. Any sane Tory would run a mile: if they offered themselves to the nation in their present shambolic state they would suffer a well-deserved defeat. They could agree no manifesto stance on Brexit, with their platforms a comical tug-of-war between at least four factions. Labour would finally have to resolve its conflict between Corbyn’s small coterie and virtually everyone else, Momentum included. A fudged “we will renegotiate” will fall apart in the first week of any campaign. Of course Labour should stand as remainers against Tory Brexiters. Look how Caroline Lucas mocked them in the Channel 4 debate: “Brexit is a project for the right, by the right and why Labour would support it I just don’t understand.” But if, lamentably, that’s a step too far, then a Labour manifesto has to promise a referendum – letting the people solve their indecision is the only way to hold the party together. Every day, a referendum looks more likely – it would be the only escape from this car crash. “Hell will freeze over before May agrees,” an ally of hers says – but it is now the last escape hatch from this hell. The Brexiters’ own “project fear” has been to terrify the nation, threatening that any attempt to run another referendum would cause rebellion, mob-rule, riots on the streets. What are they so afraid of? It’s losing, now that the polls are shifting. The country will not be intimidated by the absurd idea of people rioting against getting the chance to express themselves in a democratic vote. Watching the Ukip/Tommy Robinson march on Sunday, I saw nothing much to fear. Outnumbered 10 times by anti-racist, anti-Brexit marchers, they were a familiar little group rallying to Robinson’s boasts that “no other politician will talk about Islam”. They were mostly men, mostly middle-aged. The most notable thing about them and their “Brexit betrayal” banners was the low turnout. The “Out! Out! Out!” shouters, familiar thugs failing to find a fight, were outnumbered by ordinary people from that ordinary strand that is not just British, but found in every country. How familiar is that “keep Britain white” surge, whether it comes dressed as BNP, EDL, National Front, Combat 18, National Action or any of the other groupuscules that always implode. Whatever happened to Enoch Powell’s rivers of blood? We are where we are because Cameron’s crime was to call a referendum on foreigners and borders that predictably gave a legitimate outlet to that seam in the psyche of any country. Even more grotesque has been the Brexiters using Robinson shamelessly as their advance guard, and Iain Duncan Smith warning any second referendum will cause Paris-style riots. Even Brexit-convert Jeremy Hunt uses them to avoid a vote: “I wouldn’t rule out real social instability in this country.”  The question now is how to put all the dark passions and fears Brexit aroused back in their corner. It needs firm leadership, a rejection of racism, and someone who will take no nonsense about riots. No one but the voters can reverse what has been done, now that Brexit in all its fiendishness has been explored and found miserably wanting. Promises turned to dust. Both sides have been preparing their referendum campaigns. The Brexiters will rely on a simple but clever “Tell them again!” while remainers plan a positive “Europe works” and a negative “Did you vote to be poorer?” May will try to defer this vote until the last possible day to force a “her deal or no deal” choice. Instead she has just inched the possibility of no Brexit at all closer to the finishing line. The Treasury had better put on hold that promised 50p coin to commemorate Brexit day. • Polly Toynbee is a Guardian columnist
May releases attorney general’s full analysis after MPs’ contempt of parliament vote   Legal advice on the Brexit deal, published reluctantly after MPs found the government in contempt of parliament, warns the terms of the Irish backstop could trap the UK in “protracted and repeated rounds of negotiations” in the years ahead. The legal status of the arrangements for preventing a hard border between Northern Ireland and Ireland – and in particular, the UK’s ability to extricate itself – are at the heart of the political row about whether MPs should accept the prime minister’s deal. In a six-page document finally released on Wednesday, the attorney general, Geoffrey Cox, concedes, as he did in parliament on Monday, that the UK could be trapped indefinitely in the backstop. He stresses that the protocol setting out the backstop would “endure” even if negotiations between the two sides broke down. “In international law, the protocol would endure indefinitely until a superseding arrangement took its place,” the document says. Without a legal exit route, unless both sides agree to a satisfactory arrangement that makes the backstop unnecessary, he says the UK would have to rely on the arrangement being politically uncomfortable for the EU because it gives the UK market access without accepting single market rules in full. However, he warns that disputes about whether the UK should be able to exit could become intractable. “In the absence of a right of termination, there is a legal risk that the United Kingdom might become subject to protracted and repeating rounds of negotiations,” it concludes. “This risk must be weighed against the political and economic imperative on both sides to reach an agreement that constitutes a politically stable and permanent basis for their future relationship. This is a political decision for the government.” The shadow Brexit secretary, Keir Starmer, said: “Having reviewed the attorney general’s legal advice, it’s obvious why this needed to be placed in the public domain. “All week we have heard from government ministers that releasing this information could harm the national interest. Nothing of the sort. All this advice reveals is the central weaknesses in the government’s deal. “It is unthinkable that the government tried to keep this information from parliament – and indeed the public – before next week’s vote.” Leave supporters in the cabinet, including Michael Gove and the then Brexit secretary, Dominic Raab, had insisted on receiving legal advice before they would sign up to the backstop. Raab subsequently resigned, warning that “the regulatory regime proposed for Northern Ireland presents a very real threat to the integrity of the United Kingdom”. The details of the advice are likely to inflame the concerns of pro-Brexit MPs who fear the temporary arrangements in the backstop could become permanent. Cox finds that the “review mechanism”, painted by Downing Street as a negotiating victory, “adds little, other than procedurally, to the international law position to which the protocol is already subject”. The former chief whip Mark Harper on Tuesday became the latest senior Tory to say his party should reject the deal, and in particular, should repudiate the backstop. The government was forced to publish the legal advice after being found in contempt of parliament in a pair of historic votes on Tuesday.  Starmer had used an arcane parliamentary procedure called a humble address to demand that Cox’s full legal advice be made available to MPs. The government failed to contest the humble address, but then insisted it would only publish a summary document, which Cox presented in a statement to the House of Commons on Monday. Starmer continued to demand the full advice and, after the government lost two votes, the leader of the Commons, Andrea Leadsom, announced that it would be published.
Britain can stop Brexit process without approval of member states, court of justice says   Theresa May has dismissed the idea of abandoning Brexit after the European court of justice ruled that the UK could stop the article 50 process without seeking EU approval. The court in Luxembourg delighted remain campaigners by issuing an emergency ruling on Monday morning that, under EU law, the UK was able to unilaterally halt the article 50 process – fuelling renewed calls for a second referendum. Speaking to MPs later as she fought to defend her decision to delay a Commons vote on her deal, the prime minister admitted the ECJ’s ruling meant she was able to revoke article 50 – a decision her government had bitterly opposed. May was challenged by Liz Saville Roberts, a Plaid Cymru MP, who said the European court ruling meant it was in the prime minister’s gift to personally take Brexit off the table. The prime minister indicated that was true but made clear she had no plans to do such a thing. It would be a short-term fix, she said, but would betray voters who won the 2016 referendum. “Revoking article 50 would mean going back on the vote of the referendum and remaining in the EU,” May said. Scottish judges are to hold an emergency hearing in response to the ECJ ruling next week, chaired by Scotland’s most senior judge, Lord Carloway, the lord president, and two other judges, who now have to transpose it into domestic law. Lawyers for the cross-party group of Scottish parliamentarians who took the case to Luxembourg are expected to argue it means the prime minister is lawfully able to cancel the article 50 process without needing new legislation. Andy Wightman, the Scottish Green party MSP who led the legal challenge, said it was a momentous ruling which now meant the UK could stay in the EU and keep all its existing benefits, including its rebate, its opt-outs and the pound. “MPs now know that stopping Brexit altogether is an option open to them before the end of the article 50 period,” he said. FULL CJEU #article50 ruling now published. Clear & unambiguous. Upholds our arguments. Having read submissions & heard evidence, there really was no other legal option. https://t.co/jDosCgCgj2 pic.twitter.com/bE7AcvoTQd The pro-Brexit environment secretary, Michael Gove, played down the significance of the ECJ decision, which was announced just before he was interviewed on BBC Radio 4’s Today programme. “We voted very clearly – 17.4 million people sent a clear message that they wanted to leave the European Union. And that also means leaving the jurisdiction of the European court of justice,” he said. “So this case is all very well, but it doesn’t alter either the referendum vote or the clear intention of the government to make sure that we leave on 29 March.” While the UK could abandon Brexit before 29 March, the date on which its withdrawal from the EU under article 50 takes effect, staging a second referendum would require the EU’s agreement to extend article 50 beyond its normal two-year time limit. Rob Murray, a partner at the law firm Mishcon de Reya, which represented Gina Miller, the activist who won a supreme court ruling in 2016 that article 50 had to be authorised by parliament, said new legislation would be needed. After reading the European court ruling, Murray said: “Critically, as clarified by the Miller decision, an act of parliament would be necessary to reverse the notification of intention to withdraw.” Jolyon Maugham QC, the founder of the London-based Good Law Project, whose supporters helped fund the legal challenge, said he believed this was not necessary. All that was required, he said, was a Commons vote ordering the prime minister to stop Brexit. “We’ll obviously need to discuss it internally. But I expect we’ll say that there’s no need for fresh legislation. Parliament can direct the PM to revoke and that’ll be that. It may even be that the government doesn’t disagree,” Maugham said. He cited reports from Sky News that government ministers also privately believed no new legislation is required. However, the case is expected to be vigorously contested by the UK government, which could appeal against it to the UK supreme court in an effort to delay a final ruling. The ECJ judgment, which came only two weeks after it held an emergency hearing on the issue, had itself been expedited to coincide with the crucial vote on May’s Brexit deal in the Commons tomorrow. That vote has now been postponed as May fights to save the deal and her government after more than 100 Tory MPs, including numerous loyalist, pro-remain backbenchers, threatened to vote the deal down. Maugham and other members of his group believe the ECJ ruling raises doubts about the supreme court’s ruling in Miller in 2016 because it was partly based on the assumption that article 50 could not be unilaterally revoked. Miller’s legal team and the UK government agreed to that position because it was legally simpler to do so, Maugham said, and increased the constitutional role of parliament. The European court has now said that was wrong.
Matthew d'Ancona  Today, I shall go to the German embassy in London to sign the necessary forms so that my half-German sons may apply for dual citizenship. My father and one of my brothers have already been granted Maltese passports (my family hails from the tiny Mediterranean island). I am glad that such options are available, as a Brexit of unknowable character approaches, and at a time when the prime minister sees fit to label those of us with funny continental names “queue-jumpers”. It is fair to say that, in the circumstances, we are fortunate. Yet I think it is time to be a bit more honest and plain-speaking about those circumstances. For the most part, the debate about Brexit since the 2016 referendum has been framed primarily in economic terms. The leavers have spoken excitedly about the free-trade bonanza that supposedly lies the other side of 29 March. Remainers point out that Britain is cutting itself off from the largest single market in the world. But this to-and-fro is a polite fiction draped over a much uglier reality, and one that has little to do with GDP. I keep hearing that it is rude and counterproductive to suggest that xenophobia played a significant part in the 2016 result, and it is certainly true that such accusations should never be made lightly. All the same: there are moments when politeness is not always the highest priority, and reticence more closely resembles cowardice than civility. As Clint Eastwood’s Dirty Harry reminds us: a man’s got to know his limitations – and I’m afraid I’ve reached mine. I’m done with the whole pretence that the argument about Brexit is, and has always been, a subtle jurisprudential discussion about sovereignty, or an exciting debate about the business plan for UK plc. Look at the evidence. In June 2017, a report collated from the British Social Attitudes survey showed that the most significant factor in the leave vote was anxiety about the number of people coming to the UK. A comprehensive study published by Nuffield College in April drew similar conclusions about the salience of immigration in attitudes to Brexit. “Take back control” was indeed the slogan of the leave campaign, but it was “control” with one purpose, above all others, at its heart. Which is why Theresa May was so uncompromising last week when urged by cabinet colleagues that it was not too late to reconsider the impact of tighter immigration policy on British companies. An end to free movement, the prime minister informed them, was a non-negotiable feature of the deal that she will first put to the Commons on 4 December. It is for this reason, too, that she is uninterested in the thoughtful proposal by the Conservative backbencher Nick Boles that she should contemplate a Norway-style interim arrangement with the EU, if MPs reject her agreement with Brussels. The Norwegian model preserves freedom of movement, which, for May, is the most garish of red lines. I think something profound, unsettling but still underexplored, underpins this scale of priorities: a fundamental change that needs to be understood outside the day-to-day disasters of this useless government and even of the Brexit process itself. For decades there was something close to a political consensus that the most important metric was economic prosperity. A wealthy nation was essential both to the aspirations of individual households and the funding of public services. The Tories might give greater weight to the former, Labour to the latter. Margaret Thatcher and Gordon Brown had radically different visions of social justice and collective responsibility, of the relationship between taxation and public spending. But they were as one in their conviction that nothing much was possible without a strong economy. Brexit is both symptom and cause of a breakdown in this consensus. It can no longer be taken for granted that senior politicians, or the voters themselves, will automatically and reflexively put national wealth first. As long ago as January 2014, Nigel Farage was explicit about this: “If you said to me, would I like to see over the next 10 years a further 5 million people come into Britain and if that happened we’d all be slightly richer, I’d say, I’d rather we weren’t slightly richer.” Last week, the Bank of England warned that the UK was courting the worst recession since the 1930s. Philip Hammond was forced to concede that “the economy will be slightly smaller in the prime minister’s preferred version of the future partnership”, while the Treasury’s newly released forecasts suggest that the UK economy would be 9.3% smaller 15 years after a no-deal Brexit. Of course, such statistics are now routinely dismissed as the latest iteration of “project fear”. But the more intriguing (and alarming) point is that so many senior figures in the political class responded with such comparative calm to these appalling prognoses. We have reached the point where, to an extraordinary extent, the implementation of the 2016 referendum result trumps all else. Why so? Because, as Farage declared with more candour than most mainstream politicians can yet muster, culture is nudging old-fashioned political economy out of its prime spot. Immigration is now the gravitational centre of the whole debate: a debate much less about national wealth or national sovereignty than national identity. Beneath all the talk of “control” and “global Britain”, there is the germ of an extremely unpleasant nativism. Again, we pesky centrists are told to be quiet and to heed the concerns of those who have been “left behind”. But since there is not a shred of respectable evidence that immigration has had more than a marginal impact upon public service capacity, wage levels or net welfare costs, I am forced to conclude that there is now a sufficiency of Britons who just don’t much like people of foreign extraction, and certainly don’t want many more of them around the place. So often one hears that the British people “were not consulted” about immigration levels. To which the answer is: oh yes you damn well were. Every time you insisted on a properly staffed NHS, on social care that was halfway decent, on a service economy that worked, on affordable decorators, on your Tesco and Amazon deliveries arriving on time. Each time you took that landscape for granted, you were complicit in the immigration policy that preceded the Brexit vote. We live in a world defined by the economic, social and cultural interdependence of nation states. And those who promise that leaving the EU will deliver “control” are really promising something quite specific: a social and cultural reboot. As well as being morally contemptible, of course, this is also a complete impossibility. But those who pose as our leaders have allowed this absurd and horrible vision of Britain’s future to take root. Let us be honest about what this is all about. And then let those who are responsible take full ownership of whatever consequences lie ahead. • Matthew d’Ancona is a Guardian columnist
A British carer, a caterer and a winemaker are among those feeling anxious as MPs prepare to vote on Theresa May’s deal Their problems, fears and concerns run the gamut, from the practical to the emotional and the existential to the deeply personal. In advance of the Commons vote on Tuesday, some of the estimated 1.3 million British citizens living elsewhere in the EU worry they will lose their livelihoods because they will no longer be able to work across more than one country, or their professional qualifications may no longer be recognised. Others fear they will have to refocus and rebuild businesses they have built up over decades, or are concerned they will not now be able to look after ageing parents in the UK. Emotionally, many feel a part of their identity is being amputated. Brexit has “completely turned my life upside down”, says Fiona Godfrey, who fears being out of work in less than three months. A health policy consultant, she lives in Luxembourg and often works in Brussels and other EU member states. As a freelancer, she is deemed to be providing services and so is not covered by the Brexit withdrawal agreement, which protects the rights of employees. Deal or no deal, she faces “a daunting and huge undertaking” to find out whether she can continue to work after 29 March. While she hopes to gain Luxembourgish citizenship, if that does not come through soon she will be scrambling for legal advice. “I’ve worked all my adult life and it is a big worry to think that I might be about to lose my livelihood,” says the 53-year-old. Like many British nationals, she feels abandoned by the British government and is scathing of officials’ advice to her and other British nationals that the best way to secure status is by applying for citizenship in their host country. “I find it astonishing that the only way the British government can tell us to maintain our rights is to apply for the citizenship of another country. We are being completely ignored and abandoned and there is very little help from anyone, anywhere.” Helen Burnham and her husband, Duncan, a private chef, run a successful catering business in the Belleville valley, part of the Trois Vallées ski area, where they settled permanently 11 years ago after selling up and leaving their jobs in the UK. “We’re going to be the ones who lose out: British citizens in the EU,” says Helen Burnham, 42. “EU nationals may face barriers to living in Britain, but they’ll still have the other 27 member states to choose from. After Brexit, we won’t.” That could cost them half their annual income, she says, since, when their work catering for French, British, Belgian and Dutch clients in ski chalets is quiet during the summer months, they move their business to private villas in Spain, Portugal or Greece. “For the last 10 years, all that business has come to us through word of mouth, from contacts we’ve built up in those countries,” she says. “It will really not be easy to replicate that in the south of France. And it’s nearly 50% of our revenue.” She says she is “angry – at the whole way it’s been dealt with, how people have been treated: we were promised nothing would change. Well, a lot’s changed already.” Owing to what they hope was an administrative error, the couple were granted only temporary residence permits, but have begun the process of applying for French nationality. “We have nothing to go back to,” says Helen. “All we have is here.” Nicola James left the UK in the depths of the 1991 recession with “very little money in her pocket”. She got a job teaching English in Cologne and later worked in hotels, banking and on a cruise ship. “I am a bit of a poster child for the freedom bit of freedom of movement,” says the German language graduate. Nearly three decades later, living in the Dutch city of Enkhuizen, she finds herself caught: she fears she will one day have to choose between living with her Dutch husband, who has multiple sclerosis, or being close to her elderly parents in Hertfordshire. Under the terms of the withdrawal agreement, once the Brexit transition period is over, her husband would have no automatic right to live in the UK. Their family income is below the current UK minimum threshold, barring him from settling in the UK if the rules remain unchanged after 2020. “It seems to be to be utterly Kafkaesque to be in a situation where you didn’t get a vote and you are suddenly asking, do I leave my husband to fend for himself or do I leave my parents to just get on with it?” she says. Twelve years ago, James was diagnosed with post-traumatic stress disorder and lives with a generalised anxiety disorder. She says Brexit is not helping. “One of the worst things for mental health is uncertainty.” This week brought good news when the Dutch government announced  British citizens could stay in the event of no-deal Brexit, but she is still gripped by existential worries. “I’m being exiled for the crime of falling in love and exercising my freedom of movement rights.” At the personal level, Gavin Quinney, who after floating his IT business bought Château Bauduc in 1999 “for the price we were going to pay for a family home in Putney”, reckons his family should cope, eventually, with the practicalities of Brexit. “We’re economically active, we pay taxes and social security, two of our four children were born here so now have dual nationality, and we’re finally starting to move on residence permits for the rest of us,” he says. “There’s a distinct feeling of ‘why should we even have to’ and deep sorrow at losing our European identity.” His primary concern is for his daughter Sophie, who has special needs: he fears a no-deal Brexit could affect the French state’s provision for her. Business-wise, it is tougher. No deal would be “catastrophic”, says Quinney, who sells about 60% of the wine produced from his 65-acre vineyard direct to private customers in the UK and restaurateurs including Rick Stein and Gordon Ramsay. His short-term plan is to stockpile enough of his wine in UK warehouses to at least tide him over until the autumn. After that, he says there will be a hard border at the Channel whatever anyone claims, and his business will have to adapt. “Frictionless trade does not exist outside the single market. Once the UK is unplugged from the EU system that lets trucks go straight through Dover … Our strategy I guess will be to use the transition period to move some business away from the UK.” The Italian government has said British nationals in Italy would remain legally resident, keeping their existing rights to work, in the event of a no-deal Brexit, but myriad concerns remain. “I believed it would be easy to get a job in the legal world in Italy – it was Europe and opportunities were growing,” says Charlotte Oliver, a lawyer, who moved to Italy in 2001 to join her Italian boyfriend and became the first British solicitor to be admitted to the Italian bar council thanks to a new EU directive. “It was in fact very tough. It took 10 years, while at the same time raising two children, to build up experience and perfect my Italian.” Oliver, 52, went on to establish her own firm in 2013, but now faces uncertainty over whether her qualification as an Italian lawyer can or will be revoked, or if she can continue to practise as a British solicitor. Her rights to healthcare, a pension and freedom of movement within the EU, which is crucial for her job, are also at risk. She is applying for Italian citizenship, but that process now takes about four years, instead of two, under new rules recently approved by parliament. “It is immoral, and I believe illegal, that any person who has been given EU citizenship, and then exercised free movement, can be told our rights could be taken away,” she says. Matt Bristow returned to Berlin last summer fearing it could be his last chance. A 33-year old psychologist, he had always intended to live again in the German capital, where he owns a flat. Brexit forced a decision. “I have always felt happiest here and I felt the need to grab this opportunity while I still have it,” said Bristow, who quit the NHS earlier than planned and now works for a local authority in Berlin. Despite being fluent in German and doing part of his psychology training in the country, getting his qualifications recognised was not easy: it involved 18 months of form filling, language tests and legal translations costing hundreds of euros. At least the cost of living is cheaper than London: “I never felt like I had much money at the end of the month despite being in a reasonably well-paid professional job.” But he is increasingly anxious about no-deal Brexit, as his contract expires in the summer. “My worry is that I might be caught in a catch-22, that it will be harder to convince new employers to employ me if I haven’t got a clear residence permit, but for some residence permits you need to have a job or a clear offer of work.” While the referendum result left him devastated, he now feels frustrated with the process and believes British nationals in the EU have been forgotten by British politicians. “We are out of sight and out of mind.” After finishing her PhD Louise Howes, 30, moved to southern Sweden in 2015 to take up a research post in the astronomy department at Lund University, a contract that is up at the end of February. “My fiance is also British – we’re getting married this summer – and his contract runs another five years,” she says. “We want to stay in Sweden, we like it. So I’m currently job hunting, for something maybe in research project management or data science.” Howes says she feels a “constant underlying nervousness” about what Brexit may bring, a “level of added stress I really don’t need … We’ve been told it will all be fine, but there’s nothing in writing. If you’re in full employment it should be quite straightforward, people say – but what if you’re not?” She is also applying for jobs in Copenhagen, less than an hour’s commute away across the Oresund Bridge. “Lots of people do it, in both directions,” Howes says. “But I have absolutely no clue whether as a British citizen I’ll be allowed to after Brexit. Non-Europeans have had problems, I know.” More generally, she says, she is, like almost everyone in the university sector, “acutely aware not just of the damage it will do to British universities but the problems it’s going to cause for EU academics and researchers in Britain, and Britons in European universities”. As the hours tick by towards the Brexit deal vote on Tuesday, Les Buchanan, 75, and his wife, Louise, 71, in Barcelona find themselves assailed by an all too familiar sensation. “It’s the uncertainty,” says Les Buchanan, who worked as a diplomat for 40 years before retiring to Spain in 2000. “Once you know something, you can face up to it.” He still feels exasperated at being denied a vote in the referendum because he had lived outside the UK for too long. But the pressing concern is what happens next, especially if the UK crashes out. “We don’t really know what the Spanish government line will be,” he says. “At the moment, we’re covered by the local health service and the British government pays the Spanish government for expats who were in the British system. Will that cease?” He is also worried his sterling pension could take another knock and that the British government could use Brexit as an excuse to freeze expat pensions. But he is grateful that at least he and his wife should be able to weather the financial loss. “For young people embarking upon their lives and being denied the benefits and freedoms the EU provides, it borders on the criminal,” he says. The couple have taken the necessary tests to acquire Spanish nationality but Les Buchanan is holding off renouncing his British citizenship, as he would have to: “I’m very pissed off, but not pissed enough to say I’m not British any more.”
P&O opts for Cypriot flag, Sony confirms HQ move and Pets at Home stockpiles cat food   The scale of no-deal panic gripping major companies has been thrown into sharp focus by a series of damage-limitation announcements, as corporate Britain signalled it is running out of patience with Westminster gridlock. Sir James Dyson, the Brexit-backing billionaire, dealt a further blow to the government by revealing he is shifting his company headquarters to Singapore in a move that drew sharp criticism. Dyson’s decision to move his HQ out of the UK came on a day in which a series of high-profile names revealed measures to mitigate the impact of a disorderly departure from the EU: • P&O announced that its entire fleet of cross-Channel ferries will be re-registered under the Cypriot flag, as the 182-year-old British maritime operator activated its Brexit plans. • Sony confirmed it is moving its European headquarters from London to Amsterdam. • The chief executive of luxury carmaker Bentley said the company was stockpiling parts and described Brexit as a “killer” threatening his firm’s profitability.  • Retailers Dixons Carphone and Pets at Home announced plans to shore up supplies in the event of chaos at British ports. P&O, which began life as the Peninsular and Oriental Steam Navigation company in 1837, said all six of its cross-Channel ferries will be re-registered from the UK registry in Cyprus to keep EU tax benefits. The ferries include, the Spirit of Britain, the Pride of Kent and the Pride of Canterbury. Sony confirmed it was merging its London-based European unit with a new entity based in Amsterdam that would become the new continental HQ. Sony said: “In this way we can continue our business as usual without disruption once the UK leaves the EU.” The boss of Pets at Home, the nation’s biggest pet supplier, said his company had started stockpiling essentials – including cat food – as “we don’t want families to run out of food for their pets” after Brexit day on 29 March. Sir James Dyson failed to appear at a media event at which his company announced the relocation of its corporate base from Wiltshire to Singapore. Dyson, who was a leading supporter of the leave campaign who urged ministers to walk away without a deal saying “they’ll come to us”, did not explain why he is taking the HQ of the firm he founded in 1991 out of the UK. The chief executive of Dyson, Jim Rowan, said the move from Wiltshire to Singapore had “nothing to do with Brexit” but was about “future-proofing” the business. The move of Dyson’s legal entity from the UK to Singapore “will happen over the coming months”, meaning it could take place before Brexit. The decision to leave the UK was made by Sir James together with “the executive team”, Dyson said. Sir James, who owns 100% of the company, has built up a £9.5bn personal fortune making him the 12th richest person in Britain according to the Sunday Times rich list. A spokeswoman for the 71-year-old billionaire said he would “continue to divide his time between Singapore and the UK as the business requires it”.  His company employs 4,500 people in the UK out of a global workforce of 12,000. It said the HQ move would not affect British jobs Rowan said moving to Singapore was part of “the evolution” of the company. When asked whether Dyson could still be referred to as one of Britain’s best success stories, he said the firm should now be referred to as a “global technology company”. When he was prime minister David Cameron hailed Dyson as a “great British success story”. Sir James is not the first pro-Brexit billionaire to pull back from the UK since the referendum. Sir Jim Ratcliffe, the UK’s richest person with a £21bn fortune, was reported last year to be planning to leave Britain for Monaco.  Carolyn Fairbairn, director-general of the CBI, said the litany of business announcements should send politicians a clear and simple message. “A March no-deal must be ruled out immediately,” she said. “This is the only way to halt irreversible damage and restore business confidence.” Theresa May told business lobby groups on Tuesday that she was refusing to rule out a no deal as she tries to persuade reluctant MPs to back her Brexit plan by arguing that the only way to avoid crashing out of the EU is to sign up to her proposals. That amounted to a rebuke to the chancellor, Philip Hammond, who suggested last week that a no-deal Brexit would be taken off the table in another conference call with 330 corporate executives. Like “cliff edge”, except worse. No deal implies slamming the door on the article 50 divorce talks, which would make the prospect of a future FTA extremely remote. The chaos that would ensue is difficult to exaggerate. See our full Brexit phrasebook. Claire Walker, co-executive policy director at the British Chambers of Commerce (BCC), said it was a significant concern that businesses have been left “in the dark” about Brexit and are being forced to activate emergency plans for 29 March. Adrian Hallmark, the chief executive of Bentley, said the luxury carmaker was on track to return to profit this year, but will fail to do so in the event of a hard Brexit. He said stopping production at the company’s Crewe plant would cost the Volkswagen-owned business millions of pounds a day. “It’s Brexit that’s the killer,” he told Reuters. “If we ended up with a hard Brexit ... that would hit us this year because we do have a potential to get beyond break-even to do the turnaround. It would put at fundamental risk our chance of becoming profitable.” Dixons Carphone revealed on Tuesday it had been working with suppliers on a back up plan that would shore up its stocks of TVs and laptops. “We can’t rule out that there might be some form of interruption,” said Dixons finance chief Jonny Mason. “If there is, we are as well prepared as we can possibly be. Some suppliers have brought stock into the country so that it’s closer to where it needs to be for us.”
Brexit is just the vehicle by which a fractured state has come to realise that its politics are no longer fit for purpose  At least the Sun thrives on chaos. The savage parliamentary mauling of Britain’s withdrawal agreement with the European Union allowed Rupert Murdoch’s pet tabloid to unveil on Wednesday morning a front page of grandly gleeful malevolence. Under the headline Brextinct, it conjured a creepy chimera of Theresa May’s head pasted on to the body of a dodo. But the thing about such surreal pictures is that it is not easy to control their interpretation. From the outside, this one seemed to suggest much more than the immediately intended message that both May and her deal are politically dead. When, it prompted one to ask, did Brextinction really happen? Was this strange creature ever really alive or was it not always a grotesquely Photoshopped image of something else, a crisis of belonging that has attached itself to the wrong union? Do the events of this week point us, not towards the EU, but to the travails of a radically disunited kingdom? The dodo, after all, may be proverbially dead but it has a vivid afterlife in that great trawl of the English unconscious, Lewis Carroll’s Alice’s Adventures in Wonderland. It is the Dodo, when various characters have fallen into a pool of tears, who suggests how they might dry themselves – the Caucus-race. “There was no ‘One, two, three, and away’, but they began running when they liked, and left off when they liked, so that it was not easy to know when the race was over. However, when they had been running half an hour or so, and were quite dry again, the Dodo suddenly called out, ‘The race is over!’ and they all crowded round it, panting, and asking, ‘But who has won?’” This seems, this week more than ever, a perfect description of the state to which British politics has been reduced – a lot of frantically anarchic running overseen by a defunct creature, the Brextinct dodo. And who has won? Carroll’s Dodo, of course, decrees: “Everybody has won, and all must have prizes.” Having emptied Alice’s pockets to provide rewards for everyone else, the Dodo solemnly presents her with the only thing that’s left: her own thimble. “We beg your acceptance of this elegant thimble.” The Brexit game is patently not worth the thimble to be presented at the end of it. Yet in Theresa May’s humiliation on Tuesday, there were prizes for almost everybody else: a glimpse of opportunity for her rivals in cabinet; a revival of their sadomasochistic no-deal fantasies for the zealots; the hope of a second referendum for remainers; proof of the near-collapse of the Westminster order for nationalists; the hope of a general election for Jeremy Corbyn. But in truth nobody has won anything – it is a losing game all round. For all of this is the afterlife of dead things. One of them is Brexit itself. When did Brextinction occur? On 24 June 2016. The project was driven by decades of camped-up mendacity about the tyranny of the EU, and sold in the referendum as a fantasy of national liberation. It simply could not survive contact with reality. It died the moment it became real. You cannot free yourself from imaginary oppression. Even if May were a political genius – and let us concede that she is not – Brexit was always going to come down to a choice between two evils: the heroic but catastrophic failure of crashing out; or the unheroic but less damaging failure of swapping first-class for second-class EU membership. These are the real afterlives of a departed reverie. If the choice between shooting oneself in the head or in the foot is the answer to Britain’s long-term problems, surely the wrong question is being asked. It is becoming ever clearer that Brexit is not about its ostensible subject: Britain’s relationship with the EU. The very word Brexit contains a literally unspoken truth. It does not include or even allude to Europe. It is British exit that is the point, not what it is exiting from. The tautologous slogan Leave Means Leave is similarly (if unintentionally) honest: the meaning is in the leaving, not in what is being left or how. Paradoxically, this drama of departure has really served only to displace a crisis of belonging. Brexit plays out a conflict between Them and Us, but it is surely obvious after this week that the problem is not with Them on the continent. It’s with the British Us, the unravelling of an imagined community. The visible collapse of the Westminster polity this week may be a result of Brexit, but Brexit itself is the result of the invisible subsidence of the political order over recent decades. It may seem strange to call this slow collapse invisible since so much of it is obvious: the deep uncertainties about the union after the Good Friday agreement of 1998 and the establishment of the Scottish parliament the following year; the consequent rise of English nationalism; the profound regional inequalities within England itself; the generational divergence of values and aspirations; the undermining of the welfare state and its promise of shared citizenship; the contempt for the poor and vulnerable expressed through austerity; the rise of a sensationally self-indulgent and clownish ruling class. But the collective effects of these interrelated developments do seem to have been barely visible within the political mainstream until David Cameron accidentally took the lid off by calling a referendum and asking people to endorse the status quo. What we see with the lid off and the fog of fantasies at last beginning to dissipate is the truth that Brexit is much less about Britain’s relationship with the EU than it is about Britain’s relationship with itself. It is the projection outwards of an inner turmoil. An archaic political system had carried on even while its foundations in a collective sense of belonging were crumbling. Brexit in one way alone has done a real service: it has forced the old system to play out its death throes in public. The spectacle is ugly, but at least it shows that a fissiparous four-nation state cannot be governed without radical social and constitutional change. European leaders have continually expressed exasperation that the British have really been negotiating not with them, but with each other. But perhaps it is time to recognise that there is a useful truth in this: Brexit is really just the vehicle that has delivered a fraught state to a place where it can no longer pretend to be a settled and functioning democracy. Brexit’s work is done – everyone can now see that the Westminster dodo is dead. It is time to move on from the pretence that the problem with British democracy is the EU and to recognise that it is with itself. After Brextinction there must be a whole new political ecosystem. Drop the dead dodo, end the mad race for a meaningless prize, and start talking about who you want to be. • Fintan O’Toole is a columnist at the Irish Times and author of Heroic Failure: Brexit and the Politics of Pain
Brussels expecting UK request to extend 29 March deadline, with May’s deal on brink   The EU is preparing to delay Brexit until at least July after concluding that Theresa May is doomed to fail in getting her deal through parliament. The country’s 29 March deadline for exiting the EU is now regarded by Brussels as highly unlikely to be met given the domestic opposition facing the prime minister and it is expecting a request from London to extend article 50 in the coming weeks. A special leaders’ summit to push back Brexit day is expected to be convened by the European council president, Donald Tusk, once a UK request is received. EU officials said the length of the prolongation of the negotiating period allowed under article 50 would be determined based on the reason put forward by May for the delay. A “technical” extension until July is a probable first step to give May extra time to revise and ratify the current deal once Downing Street has a clear idea as to what will command a majority in the Commons. An EU official said: “Should the prime minister survive and inform us that she needs more time to win round parliament to a deal, a technical extension up to July will be offered.” Senior EU sources said that a further, lengthier extension could be offered at a later date should a general election or second referendum be called although the upcoming May elections for the European parliament would create complications. One EU diplomat said: “The first session of the parliament is in July. You would need UK MEPs there if the country is still a member state. But things are not black and white in the European Union.” The European commission will publish a letter on Monday giving fresh assurances on the temporary status of the Irish backstop in a hope to win over some MPs to the deal but EU officials are downplaying expectations. The heads of state and government said at a recent summit that the withdrawal agreement, and the contentious backstop that a large number of Tory MPs fear will trap the UK in a permanent customs union, could be neither altered nor reinterpreted. But officials said Brussels would be in listening mode, and take guidance from the prime minister as to the next steps should she suffer a heavy defeat as is widely expected. May has to give parliament a statement on her next move within three parliamentary working days of the vote. EU officials believe that whatever emerges will likely require a prolongation of the two-year negotiating period. That conclusion is shared in a forecast by the Economist Intelligence Unit (EIU), a leading risk analyst, which will be published on Monday. Danielle Haralambous, a UK analyst at the EIU, said: “Time is simply running out, and we’re at a stage where Brexit can probably only happen in late March now in the unlikely event that parliament approves Mrs May’s deal on 15 January, or if parliament supports leaving without a deal. For all other options, the government will need to buy more time, and we think the EU will be willing to provide it to avoid a cliff-edge situation.” On Sunday, the Brexit secretary, Stephen Barclay, insisted there had been “some movement” by MPs in favour of May’s deal while suggesting the prime minister would take guidance from parliament on what MPs could support should it fail. “The country does have a right to know what members of parliament are for, not just what they are against, and it’s important that the house comes to a view as to what it can back,” Barclay said. EU officials were quick to deny reports this week that discussions about extending article 50 had already begun with the UK. “The Brits have certainly not talked about this recently,” said one official. “If anything it is the last thing they want to talk about.” It has been suggested that the EU would respond generously, and even renegotiate the terms of the withdrawal agreement, should May pivot towards a permanent customs union in order to get her deal through parliament. One official said the refusal of EU leaders at a December summit to give May a 2021 deadline for the end of talks on a future trade deal was grounded in a belief that she had yet to offer a compelling vision that could get through parliament. “The leaders are much more savvy than people think – they can see what is happening in the UK, and they were left unconvinced that it would be possible to get a trade deal done quickly because the British government remains opaque on what it wants.” Mujtaba Rahman, a former Treasury and commission official and head of Europe for the Eurasia Group risk consultancy, said: “We think the EU will be willing to go back into the withdrawal agreement and rethink the backstop if the UK can reach a credible position that leaders believe will land an orderly withdrawal. “If the UK position were, for example, to evolve towards a permanent customs union, that could alter the dynamic of thinking around the backstop.”
Few in Westminster will admit we’re stuck. This could be the non-partisan approach that could restore trust in our politics• Lisa Nandy and Stella Creasy are Labour MPs   The Brexit process has become almost unspeakably awful. Like a foul smell that nobody really wants to deal with, without action it will only get worse. As party unity collapses in parliament, how we find consensus on the greatest issue of our time will determine what the outcome is – whether that turns out to be a second referendum or the next stage of negotiation. We believe the best path to such a consensus involves setting up a citizens’ assembly. Just like the Labour party, we represent contrasting communities that nevertheless have much in common. Wigan voted 60%-40% to leave the EU, Walthamstow 60%-40% to remain. One is a northern town fighting to regain the good jobs and dignity that were once commonplace. The other is an inner-city area fighting an epidemic of knife crime and the rise of gentrification. Separated by 200 miles, in both places people are angry, deeply affected by poverty and disempowered by a system that does not respond to their needs. Like our constituents, we hold competing views on how to resolve the Brexit stalemate. But we are united in respecting the causes of that fury, and in our belief that only a Labour government can resolve it. Without a serious attempt to bring our communities together, we will not address any of these concerns. Yet we have lost the ability to listen to one another, and our political discourse has been poisoned by anger and arrogance. Our constituents are not stupid or racist, any more than they belong to “liberal elites”. But politics has become about the box you put someone in to dismiss them, not the bridges you build to find shared solutions. This shock-jock culture thrives on extremes. People are encouraged to resign from political parties, to antagonise and abuse opponents for effect, for a YouTube hit while wearing a yellow vest, rather than to take the harder path of building support for a different approach. Throughout history, politics has had to find a path through huge and fundamental disagreements. As President John F Kennedy wrote in Profiles in Courage, it very rarely happens that “all the truth, and all the right, and all the angels are on one side”. Our refusal to acknowledge this is breaking our democracy. As sitting parliamentarians, we feel the disconnect every day, working in expensive, dilapidated buildings where there is fatuous debate about the bumper-sticker on the Speaker’s car while children go without food to eat and mental healthcare when they are in crisis. This isn’t what either of us signed up for. This momentous week, and the massive rejection of Theresa May’s Brexit deal by MPs night, will not change this state of affairs. In the days and weeks ahead, MPs will continue to perform for social media, medicines will be stockpiled, and many more jobs will be tragically lost. There may be a majority to prevent no deal but there is no majority for an outcome – and, crucially, no process that can get us there. We are nearly three years on from the referendum, and yet we are still arguing about the “will of the people”. Opinion polls and focus groups are conflicted. As has been made abundantly clear, referendums alone, like elections, are blunt instruments that remove complexity in pursuit of simple propositions. Other countries have seen their democracies strengthened by involving the public alongside parliamentarians in meaningful decision-making. It hasn’t just been in Ireland, where decades of intransigence on abortion and same-sex marriage gave way to a new consensus. It has also happened in Iceland (after the banking crisis), and in Canada and Australia, on issues such as nuclear waste and constitutional reform. President Macron, responding to widespread unrest in France, has recently embraced this approach, understanding its value in reuniting a divided country. Like a circuit-breaker, citizens’ assemblies can disrupt the bad habits that have come to characterise Brexit: kicking issues into the long grass, placing party interests over the national interest and assuming the public are unable to cope with hard choices. They don’t replace parliaments or offer politicians an escape from difficult decisions. Instead they reject binary choices – remain or leave, no deal or Norway – and allow randomly selected groups of citizens to explore options in an open forum and make recommendations about priorities to elected MPs, who retain the final say. In a deadlocked parliament, this could be the one approach that could retain the trust of us all that the answers were fair, thoughtful and not predetermined. If, for instance, a citizens’ assembly recommended a referendum, it could also consider what the question should be, providing confidence that there was no attempt by politicians to game the system. None of this need delay progress. Citizens’ assemblies can be completed in seven weeks, in contrast to the three months of Electoral Commission consultation needed to move to a second referendum. Some might sneer that we already have a citizens’ assembly, in the shape of parliament itself, failing to acknowledge the inability to make progress without meaningful public engagement. Critics might reject the idea for fear of the new. Yet anyone looking at politics right now can see new thinking is urgently required. This will be another week where Westminster repeats the same tired old conversations. No one is winning, but even as the prospect of no deal approaches, few will be honest that we are stuck. As other nations have found, involving citizens in discussions doesn’t diminish politics or politicians – it enhances the value of the conversation for both. With little evidence that more delay will resolve this situation, the public are desperate for us to change our tune. It’s time we let them help choose the music. • Lisa Nandy is Labour MP for Wigan; Stella Creasy is Labour MP for Walthamstow
  Thousands of British companies have already triggered emergency plans to cope with a no-deal Brexit, with many gearing up to move operations abroad if the UK crashes out of the EU, according to the British Chambers of Commerce. Before a crucial week in parliament, in which MPs will try to wrest control from Theresa May’s government in order to delay Brexit and avoid a no-deal outcome, the BCC said it believed companies that had already gone ahead with their plans represented the “tip of the iceberg” and that many of its 75,000 members were already spending vital funds to prepare for a disorderly exit. It said that in recent days alone, it had been told that 35 firms had activated plans to move operations out of the UK, or were stockpiling goods to combat the worst effects of Brexit. Matt Griffith, director of policy at the BCC’s west of England branch, said that many more companies had acted to protect themselves since May’s Brexit deal was decisively rejected by MPs in the Commons earlier this month. He said: “Since the defeat for the prime minister’s deal, we have seen a sharp increase in companies taking actions to try and protect themselves from the worst effects of a no-deal Brexit. No deal has gone from being one of several possible scenarios to a firm date in the diary.” Labour MP Yvette Cooper has revealed to the Observer that two major employers in her West Yorkshire constituency – luxury goods manufacturer Burberry and confectioner Haribo – had both written to her, warning of the damaging effects of no deal on their UK operations. Burberry employs 750 people in Castleford, and Haribo 700 across her constituency. Cooper is pushing for a Commons amendment – likely to be voted on in Tuesday’s debate – that would pave the way for Brexit to be delayed until the end of this year. Last week some of the UK’s largest employers – including Airbus, Europe’s largest aerospace manufacturer, which employs 14,000 people in the UK and supports another 110,000 through supply chains – warned of potentially disastrous effects of no deal on its UK activities. Tom Enders, the boss of Airbus, said: “Please don’t listen to the Brexiters’ madness, which asserts that because we have huge plants here we will not move and we will always be here. They are wrong.” Ever since the vote to leave the EU in 2016, business groups including the BCC and the Confederation of British Industry have lobbied ministers, arguing that our exporters need access to the EU’s customs union, which allows goods to be imported tariff-free. But the prime minister has insisted that the UK must leave both the customs union and EU single market if it the referendum result of 2016 is to be fully respected. Business concerns are growing as Downing Street braces for a series of Commons ambushes over Brexit this week. As well as moves to delay the date of leaving beyond 29 March, MPs worried about a cliff-edge exit or a hard Brexit are also planning to force a series of “indicative votes” in parliament on a range of alternative ways forward. These include a Norway-style arrangement and a second referendum. Some ministers, including Amber Rudd, the work and pensions secretary, and Richard Harrington, the business minister, have signalled they could quit if May does not allow them to back plans to delay Brexit by granting all Tory MPs including ministers a free vote on the issue. Meanwhile, some pro-Brexit cabinet ministers are pushing the PM to submit her own amendment pledging to renegotiate her Brexit deal, in a bid to win over Tory Brexiters and the Northern Irish DUP. Concerns are growing within the Tory party that the impasse may end in a snap election. Today, writing in the Observer, cabinet minister David Lidington says he shares the concerns of those worried about no deal and says the government intends to put a revised deal back to the Commons for another “meaningful vote” next month. “Once we have a blueprint for a plan that can secure the support of the House, the prime minister will go back to the EU,” Lidington writes. “MPs will then have another meaningful vote as soon as possible.” Meanwhile European commission president Jean-Claude Juncker has warned Theresa May in a private phone call that shifting her position in favour of a permanent customs union is the price she will need to pay for the EU revising the Irish backstop. He said without a major shift in the PM’s position, the current terms of the withdrawal agreement were “non-negotiable”. Details of the call, contained in a leaked diplomatic note, emerged as Juncker’s deputy, Frans Timmermans, told the Observer that there had been no weakening of the resolve in Brussels in support of Ireland, and accused the Tory Brexiters of a “cavalier” approach to peace. “Let me be extremely clear: there is no way I could live in a situation where we throw Ireland under the bus,” Timmermans said. 
Nearly 90% of party members would opt to stay in the EU in a ‘people’s vote’, finds survey   Labour members are significantly more opposed to Brexit than Jeremy Corbyn is, with 72% of them thinking their leader should fully support a second referendum, according to a study of attitudes in the party. The polling, part of an ongoing wider academic study into attitudes in various parties, found that only 18% opposed Labour campaigning for a second referendum, while 88% would then opt for remain if such a vote was held. Official Labour policy is that a second referendum could potentially be considered if there is not a general election. However, Corbyn is publicly lukewarm on the idea, and prompted dismay among some party activists last month by saying he expected Brexit to happen even if Labour won a snap election. Corbyn is facing intense pressure from some in the party to change course, with one pro-remain party group pushing for a motion that Labour would guarantee a referendum if there was a general election. The study, part of the Party Members Project led by Prof Tim Bale of Queen Mary University of London, found that while Labour members still strongly supported their leader overall, they appear both distanced from his views on Brexit and, for some, sceptical about his motives on the subject. The polling of 1,034 party members shortly before Christmas found that almost two-thirds believed Corbyn was doing very well or fairly well as leader, and 58% believe he could get a better Brexit deal than Theresa May as prime minister. But asked why they felt Corbyn had not campaigned for a second referendum, 23% of those asked said it was because the Labour leader backed leaving the EU. Another 34% put the decision down to not wanting to alienate Labour voters. If a new referendum was held, 88% of members would back remain, both in a two-way vote against either May’s plan or no deal, or in a three-way poll between all of them. The findings “increase the pressure on Labour’s leader to get off the fence”, Bale said. “If Jeremy Corbyn genuinely believes, as he has repeatedly claimed, that the Labour party’s policy should reflect the wishes of its members rather than just its leaders, then he arguably has a funny way of showing it – at least when it comes to Brexit,” he said. There was, he noted, some difference between the views of Labour voters and members. While a parallel poll of 1,675 voters found 73% of the party’s supporters believed the Brexit decision was a mistake, for members that rises to 89%. On the impact of a no-deal departure, 89% of members said this would harm the economy in the medium to long term, against 65% of current Labour voters and 45% of all voters. Of the near-third of members who said they oppose Labour’s current Brexit policy, 56% said the issue could make them quit the party – a potential loss of 88,000 people. Bale said Corbyn “does need to think carefully about whether his ambiguity on the issue is quite as cunningly clever as many commentators seem to believe”. He added: “It is because, if Corbyn carries on like this, then Labour risks losing some of the members on whom it’s relying to give it the activist edge over the Conservatives at the next general election.” A Labour spokesman said: “As unanimously agreed at Labour party conference, if Theresa May’s botched Brexit deal is voted down in parliament then a general election should be called. In line with the policy agreed at conference, if the Conservatives block a general election then we will keep all options on the table, including the option of campaigning for a public vote.”
MPs vote down EU withdrawal agreement in resounding defeat for prime minister   Theresa May has sustained the heaviest parliamentary defeat of any British prime minister in the democratic era after MPs rejected her Brexit deal by a resounding majority of 230. The prime minister immediately announced that she would welcome a vote of no confidence in her own government, and would make time for it on Wednesday. The Labour leader, Jeremy Corbyn, quickly confirmed he had tabled the motion, with the support of the leaders of all other opposition parties. Corbyn told MPs: “This is a catastrophic defeat. The house has delivered its verdict on her deal. Delay and denial has reached the end of the line.” May said if she survived the vote – which appeared likely, after the Democratic Unionist party said it would back her – she would hold cross-party meetings with senior parliamentarians “to identify what would be required to secure the backing of the house”. Brexit-supporting Conservatives joined with opposition parties and the DUP to trounce the government in the “meaningful vote”, which the prime minister delayed before Christmas in the vain hope of winning over waverers. It means that Theresa May's Brexit deal has not passed - and its record scale puts severe pressure on the prime minister. Immediately after she lost by 230 votes, Jeremy Corbyn tabled a no-confidence motion. Under parliamentary convention, if the official opposition tables a motion saying "That this house has no confidence in Her Majesty’s government", the expectation is that ministers will allow time for it promptly. The leader of the Commons, Andrea Leadsom, has said that Wednesday's debate will run from the end of prime minister's questions at about 12.45pm until 7pm, when there will be a vote. There would not be an immediate election; instead, there would be a period of 14 calendar days in which the government can seek to regain the confidence of MPs, or else another government can be formed. If this does not happen, then parliament will be dissolved, with the standard 25 working-day gap needed before the election is held. Since the provision has not yet been used, it remains unclear how, if at all, this grace period could potentially be used to form a different government, for example a coalition or a minority Labour administration. The signs point to no. However much many Conservative MPs dislike May’s Brexit plan they are not keen on an election. Just as crucially, May’s DUP coalition partners, who voted against the Brexit deal, immediately pledged they would back the PM. She begins to dance around some form of Plan B. May said she would immediately start talks with both Tories and people in other parties “in a constructive spirit” to seek a deal that could win the support of the Commons.  Whatever happens, she must present a “motion in neutral terms” presenting her proposed next steps to the Commons by Monday. This could be amended, meaning in theory backbenchers with their own ideas could try to seize control of the process. May began the eighth day of the Brexit debate by making a last-ditch plea to colleagues to support her, warning them not to break their promise to the British people to deliver Brexit. “This is the most significant vote that any of us will ever be part of in our political careers. After all the debate, all the disagreement, all the division, the time has now come for all of us in this house to make a decision. A decision that will define our country for decades to come,” she said. “Together we can show the people we serve that their voices have been heard, that their trust was not misplaced. Earlier in the day, as one Conservative backbencher after another stood up to slam her painstakingly negotiated withdrawal agreement in the House of Commons, it became clear that few had changed their mind – though whips urged MPs to abstain, rather than vote against the government. May herself embarked on a last-ditch charm offensive on Tuesday, holding meetings with MPs including the European Research Group’s Steve Baker, who said the pair had held a “constructive and substantial conversation about the future”. Speaking just before the vote, the Labour leader, Jeremy Corbyn, said “the prime minister has treated Brexit as a matter for the Conservative party, rather than the good of the whole country”. He called the government’s efforts to steer Brexit through parliament “one of the most chaotic and extraordinary parliamentary processes” he had experienced in 35 years as an MP. The attorney general, Geoffrey Cox, had earlier warned his colleagues that if they did not accept the deal, they risked condemning Britain to the chaos of a no-deal Brexit. “It would be the height of irresponsibility for any legislator to contemplate with equanimity such a situation,” he said. He argued that members of the public affected by no deal would say to MPs: “What are you playing at? What are you doing? You are not children in the playground. You are legislators, and this is your job.” Both Labour and the Scottish National party withdrew amendments to the government’s motion at the last minute, to allow MPs a clean vote on the deal. Just one amendment, tabled by the Brexiter John Baron and proposing a unilateral exit mechanism for the Irish backstop, was voted on and soundly defeated, by 600 votes to 24. Throughout the turbulent period since she became prime minister in the wake of the shock referendum result in 2016, May has battled to unite her party over Brexit. Despite that, she faced a string of resignations, including two Brexit secretaries – David Davis and Dominic Raab – over the details of the deal. The publication on Monday of letters between May and the European commission president, Jean-Claude Juncker, about the Irish backstop failed to win over Tory MPs who feared the UK could be trapped in a quasi-permanent customs union. Downing Street said May opened her weekly cabinet meeting on Tuesday by saying the government was the servant of the people, and pledging to deliver the referendum result. She will now come under intense pressure to cede control of the next steps in the Brexit process to parliament. A spokesman for Donald Tusk, the president of the European council, said: “We regret the outcome of the vote, and urge the UK government to clarify its intentions with respect to its next steps as soon as possible.” Government defeats by more than 100 votes are vanishingly rare; the only ones recorded in the past century occurred during the minority Labour government of 1924. Postwar, the only government defeats on a similar scale were by 89 in 1979, and 86 in 1978.
Prime minister invites party leaders to discuss alternative deal but sticks to red lines   Theresa May has survived as prime minister after weathering a dramatic no-confidence vote in her government, but was left scrambling to strike a Brexit compromise that could secure the backing of parliament. In a statement in Downing Street on Wednesday night, the prime minister exhorted politicians from all parties to “put aside self-interest”, and promised to consult with MPs with “the widest possible range of views” in the coming days. It followed her announcement that she would invite Jeremy Corbyn and other party leaders for immediate talks on how to secure a Brexit deal, something she had declined to do earlier in the day, although Labour later said Corbyn would decline the invitation unless no-deal was taken off the table. A day after overwhelmingly rejecting her Brexit deal, rebel Conservatives and Democratic Unionist party (DUP) MPs swung behind the prime minister to defeat Labour’s motion of no confidence by 325 votes to 306 – a majority of 19. In her late-night statement, the prime minister said: “I am disappointed that the leader of the Labour party has not so far chosen to take part – but our door remains open … It will not be an easy task, but MPs know they have a duty to act in the national interest, reach a consensus and get this done.” The Scottish National party’s leader in Westminster, Ian Blackford, met May on Wednesday night, and the Liberal Democrat leader, Vince Cable, also accepted her invitation. Blackford later wrote to May, urging her to make a “gesture of faith” to show that she was serious. He said the SNP would take part in cross-party talks if she was able to confirm “that the extension of article 50, a ruling out of a no-deal Brexit and the option of a second EU referendum would form the basis of those discussions”. With just five days to go before May must make a statement to parliament setting out her Brexit plan B, Downing Street continued to indicate that she was not ready to budge on her red lines, including membership of a customs union. Conservative politicians are deeply divided about how May should adapt her deal to win over hostile MPs. The South Cambridgeshire Tory MP, Heidi Allen, said: “I thought she was incredibly brave [after the Brexit defeat] and it felt like she got that we need to change. But today it was: ‘I’ll talk to people, but my red lines are still there.’ And that’s not going to work at all. “Maybe the prime minister needs a little bit longer but she has got to reflect: stop pandering to the hard right of my party and start talking to those of us who have been working across parties for months. We’re a functioning, collaborative body already. She just needs to tap into us.” Some cabinet ministers clearly indicated the need for flexibility. The justice secretary, David Gauke, warned that the government should not allow itself to be “boxed in”, and Amber Rudd suggested a customs union could not be ruled out. Labour has not ruled out tabling further no-confidence votes in the days ahead, in the hope of peeling off exasperated Tory rebels and triggering a general election. But on Wednesday night other opposition parties sent a letter to Corbyn, which said they expected him to honour his promise to back a public vote if Labour failed to get an election. A Lib Dem source suggested the party may not back future no confidence votes if it felt they were a way to evade the issue. “We will support any real opportunity to take down the Tories with relish. We will not be party to Corbyn using spurious means to avoid Labour policy, by pursuing unwinnable no-confidence votes,” the source said. The DUP was quick to stress that without its 10 MPs, the government would have lost the confidence vote, and called on May to focus on tackling their concerns with the Irish backstop. “Lessons will need to be learned from the vote in parliament. The issue of the backstop needs to be dealt with and we will continue to work to that end,” said Nigel Dodds, the DUP leader at Westminster. May’s spokesman said a no-deal Brexit could not be ruled out. However, the Daily Telegraph claimed to have got hold of a recording of Philip Hammond speaking to business leaders on Tuesday night in which the chancellor said the threat of a no-deal could be taken “off the table” within days. May’s spokesman suggested a customs union was not up for discussion: “We want to be able to do our own trade deals, and that is incompatible with either the or a customs union.”  After meeting party leaders, May is expected to extend the invitation to opposition backbenchers over the coming days, as well Tory Eurosceptics. “We want to find a way forward and we are approaching this in a constructive spirit,” May’s spokesman said. “We’ve set out the principles but clearly there is an overriding aim – to leave the European Union with a good deal – and we are open-minded.” Civil servants and political staff are likely to attend the meetings, and ministers can direct civil servants to draw up more concrete plans where necessary, but the talks will not have the same formal status as coalition negotiations. Wednesday’s vote followed an ill-tempered debate in which Corbyn accused May of presiding over a “zombie government”. “It is clear that this government are not capable of winning support for their core plan on the most vital issue facing this country. The prime minister has lost control and the government have lost the ability to govern.” Labour’s deputy leader, Tom Watson, wound up the debate for his party by saying May would for ever be known as “the nothing-has-changed prime minister”. “No one doubts her determination, which is generally of an admirable quality, but, misapplied, it can be toxic,” he said. “And the cruellest truth of all is that she doesn’t possess the necessary political skills, empathy, ability, and most crucially, the policy, to lead this country any longer.” The environment secretary, Michael Gove, responded with a robust speech widely regarded at Westminster as a leadership pitch, praising May’s “inspirational leadership” and attacking Corbyn on issues from antisemitism to foreign policy. “If he cannot protect the proud traditions of the Labour party, how can he possibly protect his country?” he asked. One former Labour MP, John Woodcock, who resigned from the party after being investigated over sexual harassment claims, abstained from the vote, saying Corbyn was “unfit to lead the country”. Had the motion passed, MPs would have had 14 days for an alternative government to emerge that could command a majority in the Commons, or a general election would have been triggered. Corbyn is now likely to come under pressure from party activists to move towards supporting a second referendum. A group of more than 70 Labour MPs announced on Wednesday morning that they were backing the call for a “people’s vote”. Labour’s formal position, adopted at its conference in Liverpool last year, commits the party to press for a general election. Failing that, all options are on the table, including that of campaigning for a second referendum.
Only 89 trucks take part in trial of emergency traffic system designed to cope with 6,000 vehicles    A live rehearsal of an emergency traffic system that will be put in place to prevent congestion in Dover in the event of a no-deal Brexit has been described as “a waste of time” by drivers participating in the test in Kent on Monday. The Road Haulage Association said the dry run of a contingency traffic plan for the port was “too little, too late”. The location for the Department for Transport’s trial was a disused airport north of the Kent port that was once used to test the bouncing bombs employed in the Dambuster raids in the second world war. Under contingency plans, Manston airport will be used as a parking facility for 6,000 lorries, but only 89 participated in the trial staged at 8am on Monday. The drivers, paid £550 each by the government, started their journey at dawn at the airport, where they queued before being given the go-ahead to drive to a second holding area, a three-mile stretch of the A256, which had been coned-off to normal traffic. From there they were directed en masse to Dover, Britain’s biggest roll-on-roll-off port that handles about 10,000 lorries a day. After the first dry run drivers said while it was good the government was doing something the exercise was so small it was pointless. “It’s a waste of time. They should have done it in rush-hour. You can see the traffic here is just average. This is not what it will be like in no-deal,” said Adam Carter, a driver with Int Logistics. It took about an hour for lorries to make the 20-mile journey to Dover and it appeared to go smoothly with no queues evident en route. “To be honest, it was a waste of time. At least they have done something and it worked, but 80 trucks from our point of view isn’t testing the system,” said David Martin, who is also a driver with Int Logistics. He said the government’s contingency plan would create huge expense for drivers in petrol and other costs, particularly those who would be forced to go to Manston airport even if their final transit point was the Eurotunnel, several miles up the coast from Dover. “When you’re doing that extra 40 miles two or three times a week and at eight miles to the gallon, it all adds up,” added Martin, whose company transports frozen and chilled food including cheese and yoghurt from the continent to British supermarkets. Brexiters in favour of no deal say there will be no checks at Dover if the UK crashes out of the EU, but French authorities have warned that 100% of food and livestock has to be checked at special border inspection posts. The Calais politician Xavier Bertrand has said a two-minute delay would lead to a 27,000-strong queue on both sides of the channel. And the Road Haulage Association has said the documentation required if the UK leaves the single market is so impractical it would take eight hours per truck to complete. The challenge facing the government and Kent county council was evident at dawn as an argument broke out between marshals about where the trucks were supposed to go. The association described the test as “window dressing”, saying it could not possibly mimic the reality of 6,000 trucks that would be held at Manston airport in the event of no deal. “This is designed to test what happens if there is no deal and Operation Brock is implemented,” said a spokesman referring to the codename for the Brexit traffic management plan. Kent county council has warned a no-deal Brexit could cause major disruption across Kent, with gridlock on the roads around Dover. Rod McKenzie, the managing director of policy for the Road Haulage Association, said the rehearsal was too limited in scope. “Critics might call it window dressing,” he said. “With 89 trucks, in no way can it replicate a potential 6,000 trucks that might need to be held in or around Kent and Manston. This planning should have been done many months ago, and preferably on a bigger scale. It should have been continuous and stress-tested, I doubt many truck drivers will be impressed by this. “What we need is a deal or at least a transition deal. Business is simply not ready for a cliff-edge Brexit,” he said. Local driver Jim Andrews said it was a good idea to use the route from Manston airport but questioned the leadership of Chris Grayling, the transport secretary, on no-deal planning for Kent, which will bear the brunt of traffic disruption. “I love my country, but we are a nation of lions led by donkeys. Nobody asks us, the people in Kent, the drivers, what we think,” said Andrews, a supporter of Brexit. Neil Wheeler, an NHS security official who was at a truckers’ stop along the route, said he was concerned about emergency services. “If you have gridlock and you have an accident on the road, I do not see how you will be able to get to hospital,” he said. Staff at the nearby McDonalds said local drivers had steered clear of the area this morning. “Everyone knew this was happening, so stayed away. It’s been very quiet,” said one. A DfT spokesman said it did not expect a no-deal scenario, but it was “the duty of a responsible government to continue to prepare for all eventualities and contingencies, including a possible no deal”. He added that “any lessons learned from today and further mitigation measures will be considered carefully” to ensure the system was fully functional if needed. 
EU reportedly determined to avoid uncertainty of three-month extension requests Brexit could be delayed until 2021 under plans being explored by the EU’s most senior officials, at a time of growing exasperation over Theresa May’s handling of the talks, the Guardian can reveal. A lengthy extension of the negotiating period is gaining traction as the EU’s default position should the Commons continue to reject May’s deal, and a request emerge. Replacing the 21-month transition period with extra time as a member state would allow the UK and the EU to develop their plans for the future relationship with the aim of making the contentious Irish backstop redundant. Brussels is determined to avoid offering a short extension only to have to revisit the issue in the summer when the government again fails to win round parliament. “If leaders see any purpose in extending, which is not a certainty given the situation in the UK, they will not do a rolling cliff-edge but go long to ensure a decent period to solve the outstanding issues or batten down the hatches,” one EU diplomat said. “A 21-month extension makes sense as it would cover the multi-financial framework [the EU’s budget period] and make things easier. Provided leaders are not completely down with Brexit fatigue, and a three-month technical extension won’t cut it, I would expect a 21-month kick [of the can]. It is doing the rounds in Brussels corridors. Martin Selmayr [the European commission’s secretary-general], among others, also fond of the idea.” Exasperation with May’s handling of Brexit is growing in Brussels as senior insiders put the chance of the UK crashing out without a deal at “more than 50%”. Informed sources say there is dismay that senior government figures are focused on seeking domestic political advantage and appear wilfully blind to the opposition to reopening the withdrawal agreement. One insider said there was concern that there was no domestic consensus over the withdrawal agreement but also over the UK’s position on what kind of trading relationship it wanted when the transition period elapsed. “Some say: ‘We can have Norway, we can have Canada, we can have a customs union, we can’t have a customs union. Some of them say we are not to be trusted because they think we are going to use the backstop to keep them in the EU forever, but if you look at the confusion, you can see precisely why the backstop is necessary,” said an insider. There is also disquiet that Ireland will be scapegoated for no deal when member states believe the country is being used as a proxy to tease out positions on future trade talks. For this reason “any attempt to blame the Irish for no deal will backfire,” said a source. There is also bewilderment that the recent flurry of meetings in Brussels involving May’s Brexit secretary, Stephen Barclay, and the attorney general, Geoffrey Cox, are being characterised in London as “negotiations” when the reality is the EU is still waiting for the prime minister to show them the alternative arrangements for the Irish backstop for which she claims to have a majority in support. The frustration being felt in Brussels was evident after Cox arrived in Brussels with no concrete proposals. “We are still in wait-and-see mode. There is a feeling that Britain is overplaying how things are going,” said an insider. One senior EU diplomat said May was to blame for failing to confront hardline Eurosceptic Tories. “She gave the impression that you can stay in your delusional comfort zone, but you can’t,” the diplomat said. “Unless she is ready to choose there is nothing we can do.” Concerns emerged as May flew in to the Red Sea resort of Sharm el-Sheik for an EU-Arab league of states summit on Sunday, and confirmed she would not be putting a revised Brexit deal to the Commons this week. Even so she insisted that it “within our our grasp to leave the EU by 29 March and that is what we are planning to do”. May said she would instead put the deal to parliament on 12 March and brushed off the calls by three cabinet ministers – Amber Rudd, David Gauke and Greg Clark – for a no-deal scenario to be ruled out. “What we see around the cabinet table are strong views on the issue of Europe,” she said. “What we are doing as a government is ensuring we are doing everything we can to leave the European Union with a deal. “People are talking about the extension of article 50 as if it solves the issue when of course it won’t. It defers the point of decision. There comes a point when we must make that decision.” There is growing support, however, among MPs for an amendment due to be tabled this week by the former Labour and Conservative cabinet ministers Yvette Cooper and Oliver Letwin, which would instruct May to seek an extension of article 50 if she does not have a deal ratified by 13 March. As he arrived at the summit in Egypt, Sebastian Kurz, the Austrian chancellor, offered his support for a delay to Brexit given the impasse in the negotiations. “If by the beginning of March there’s no support for the deal then I think it would be good to postpone Brexit because a no-deal scenario is bad for the EU but extremely bad for the UK,” Kurz told reporters. EU officials are understood to be looking at options if such an extension request is received: a three-month “technical” extension to allow extra time for ratification if the parliamentary process develops positively, or a longer prolongation of nine to 21 months should there be no clear way to break the current impasse. A source close to the European council president, Donald Tusk, said that as a request had yet to be made by Downing Street, the issue had not been discussed by leaders. “No Tusk position on this,” the official said of the mooted 21-month extension. “At this stage, at least.” But sources said the EU was determined to avoid a series of three-month extension requests by the UK, which would cause damaging uncertainty, leaving Brussels unable to plan for the future. The emergence of the idea of a 21-month delay to Brexit will be seen by some as an attempt to push Brexiter MPs into backing May’s deal. The EU’s chief negotiator, Michel Barner, had advised ambassadors last week that the threat of a lengthy extension could be used by May as leverage in talks with her Brexiter MPs as she seeks to nudge the deal through parliament. May is meanwhile driving on with seeking legally binding changes to the withdrawal agreement to reassure Brexiters of the temporary nature of the Irish backstop, which would keep the UK in a customs union to avoid a hard border on the island of Ireland. The prime minister updated Tusk during a 30-minute meeting at the summit in Egypt on her plans for the meaningful vote. “No tensions,” an EU source said. “Focus on practicalities.” Tusk was said to have told May that the EU would have “clarity that a proposal for the way forward can command a majority in the UK, before the issue is tackled by the European council”. The Irish taoiseach, Leo Varadkar, who will hold talks with May on Monday in Egypt, dismissed claims made earlier on Sunday by Michael Gove, the environment secretary, that a time limit or unilateral exit mechanism from the Irish backstop could still emerge from the talks. “A backstop that includes a time-limit is not a backstop at all. Nor would a unilateral exit clause work for us,” Varadkar said.
Seven correspondents report on how the UK’s political upheaval has affected its image on the continent   The comment slipped out after a long, geeky conversation about Brexit’s potential impact on Ireland’s trade, employment, banking and consumer confidence. “You know, we’d almost forgotten how good it felt to stick it to the Brits.” The speaker shrugged and grinned. “Old habits.” This was not a grizzled Sinn Féin party activist in west Belfast, but a young business professional in a cafe near the Dublin headquarters of Facebook and Google – the heart of new, globalised Ireland. Yet here was an admission – a declaration – of schadenfreude echoing down from a centuries-old resentment at the colonial master who came and stayed for 800 years. I hear it from officials, shopkeepers, academics, truckers, artists and students: the Irish government is right to insist on the backstop, and if that gives Britain’s ruling class an aneurysm, well, grab some popcorn and enjoy the spectacle. A tendency to enjoy the neighbour’s discomfort had faded in recent decades. John Major and Tony Blair earned respect for the Good Friday agreement. The Irish economy took off. There was a sense of a fresh start in Anglo-Irish relations. In the centenary year of Ireland’s war of independence, Brexit seems to have turned the clock back. But it hasn’t, not really. There is some relish at Westminster’s convulsions – the parliament of Oliver Cromwell reduced to Benny Hill. But the overwhelming emotion is worry that Britain will crash out of the EU without a deal, wreaking havoc on Ireland’s economy and destabilising Northern Ireland. And there is also sadness. A once-valued diplomatic partner, a neighbour with whom Ireland shares myriad cultural commonalities, is turning away. Glee at Westminster dysfunction is, it seems, an attempt to extract solace from a sense that Britain doesn’t care about breaking Irish hearts. “Brexit has damaged so many ways of doing business,” says Eunan O’Halpin, a history professor at Trinity College Dublin. “There is a sense that with the British unless it’s written down, you can’t trust anything they say.” Rory Carroll “It’s a mixture of bemusement and bewilderment,” says Michiel van Hulten, a former MEP. “On one level it’s entertaining, great spectacle. A pantomime you can’t stop watching. As you know, we love British comedy. Except this isn’t Monty Python, it’s your politicians.” In June 1667, Samuel Pepys recorded an English MP spluttering: “I think the Devil shits Dutchmen,” after the Dutch fleet sailed merrily up the Medway and trashed the pride of the Royal Navy. Anglo-Dutch relations have come a long way since then. Politically, minds met in the EU: pragmatic, and distrusting of a Franco-German stitch-up. In business, dual-nationals Shell and Unilever flourished; more than 80,000 Dutch companies now trade with the UK. And the people? The Dutch master English like none other; admire and consume British culture in quantity; adore British humour. The Brits were people the Dutch could relate to. Then came Brexit. It’s bewildering, says Van Hulten. “We had such a close relationship. For a whole postwar generation, the UK was a shining example. People just cannot fathom that a country that played such a vital role internationally, and in Europe, cannot even manage its own affairs.” Thijs van den Berg, an Amsterdam English teacher, says he feels rejected. “As with any ex-lover, you now dislike what used to attract you. We liked your eccentricity because we knew at heart you were serious. Now you don’t look serious at all. Those jokes, that posturing – it just looks silly. Irresponsible.” The Dutch, who reckon even a soft Brexit will cost them 3% of GDP, are better prepared than anyone for no deal. And there are silver linings: besides the European Medicines Agency, big-name multinationals such as Sony and Panasonic are shifting their EU HQs to Amsterdam, and 250 more firms are talking about it. Then there is the fact that Brexit has inoculated them against the Nexit their wilder politicians are still flogging: 72% now say they are best off in the EU. But mainly, a country they once felt they knew has become a mystery. When parliament sent Theresa May back to Brussels to renegotiate, the Dutch paper Trouw described it thus: “It’s a bit like the crew of the Titanic deciding, by majority vote, that the iceberg really must get out of the way.” Jon Henley Spain may be preoccupied with domestic issues – the landmark trial of Catalan independence leaders and the sudden eruption of the far-right, to name only two – but the Brexit pantomime continues to fascinate, confuse and appal. Spaniards, who have long viewed British politics as an ancient beacon of democracy and informed debate, are struggling to reconcile their ideal with the realities of recent days, weeks and months. “We’ve always had a bit of a complex – always thought our democracy was more imperfect because it was younger than that of France, the UK or Germany,” says Marta García Aller, a journalist with the online newspaper El Independiente. But the UK political class’s uncanny ability to ensure that Brexit somehow manages to play out as both tragedy and farce has marked a before and an after. “I think most people see it as chaos – and that’s very strange in a country whose people have such a strong reputation for being disciplined and well-organised,” says García Aller. There is, however, little schadenfreude. Spain is devoutly pro-EU and all too aware of how much is at stake. Perhaps that’s why the word that comes up most frequently in relation to Brexit is incertidumbre, or uncertainty. “People are starting to realise that this is all really happening, and worrying about what it will mean for the Spanish economy,” says García Aller. “What’s going to happen with the British tourists who are fundamental to the economy? To the retired Britons who live here? The thousands of Spaniards who work in the UK? We’ve all got a friend or know someone who’s a nurse in a British hospital or a teacher in a British university.” Ignacio Molina, a senior analyst at the Elcano Royal Institute in Madrid, agrees Brexit has disfigured the image of British politics as “moderate, pragmatic and dependable”. In the bungled departure preparations, he sees echoes of the UK’s post-imperial wane. According to Molina, the “systemic failure” of Brexit has called into question the very idea of “the great British democracy. It’s a project that hasn’t been thought through. Even with Trump, there’s a strategy. But with Brexit there’s no strategy and no plan. It’s the most un-British thing there is!” Sam Jones As Brexit turns into what one French commentator called a “national psychodrama” – or, in the more prosaic words of a friend, “un big mess” – many French are addressing Britons with the sympathy normally reserved for the bereaved. “So sorry,” they say, as a no-deal B-Day looms. “What will you do now?” There is little gloating, much genuine concern, and massive incomprehension. The journalist Pierre Haski sums up Brexit bafflement: “Did electors really vote Brexit to allow the haughty aristocrat Jacob Rees-Mogg or the demagogue Boris Johnson to challenge Theresa May … or for Jeremy Corbyn to get into Downing Street without saying what he will do about Brexit?” It was a genuine question. The Channel tunnel has been key to softening historically fraught Anglo-French relations; personal and cultural links have grown richer now that travelling between Paris and London is less traumatic than the average commute. As for the infamous “love-hate” relationship, of late the loathing has been largely one way. Screaming British tabloid headlines accuse France of deliberately orchestrating no-deal mayhem, while in the real world the French government is doing precisely the opposite. Thankfully, the abuse is shrugged off. If there is a response, it is frustration. “We’ve spent hundreds of hours on Brexit – and we do have other things to do,” one French civil servant tells me. Some try to make sense of the Westminster spectacle. Jean-Marc Puissesseau, the president of the company that runs the Calais port – also working hard to avoid Brexit chaos – says there were signs of Brexit years ago. “You had special conditions. You continued to drive on the left, you kept the pound … perhaps Great Britain is so fundamentally insular and protective of its own future and freedom, this is its destiny. But it’s a pity.” Hélène Orain, the director of Paris’s Museum of Immigration, hopes “the links between our countries will not stop, and we can continue to recount our common history”. If there is any silver lining to the present impenetrable Brexit cloud, it may be a growing feeling, for many Britons in France, that behind all the “frog” and “rosbif” nonsense, the French are really quite fond of us. Kim Willsher Signs of Anglophilia are easy to spot in Prague: a square named after Winston Churchill, a bunch of English-language bookshops and several branches of Marks & Spencer. Since the Velvet revolution that heralded the end of communism in 1989, most Czech politicians, diplomats and opinion-formers have routinely deferred to Britain as a cradle of democracy and common sense. All this has added to Czechs’ bewilderment at the seemingly chaotic drama unfolding at Westminster as the UK staggers towards the EU departure gate. Jiří Pehe, a political analyst and director at New York University in Prague, recently summed up the mood when he tweeted that politics in Britain had become even worse than its Czech counterpart. “The infantilisation of politics, to say ‘if it’s not my way, it won’t be any other way’, reminds me of Czech politics,” he explains. “We ascribe it to the fact that Czech democracy is so young, and recovering from communism. To see an established democracy like Britain descending into this chaos and irrationality is really disheartening. It’s a very comprehensive defeat for British politics.” Some Czech policymakers worry that Britain’s impending departure from the EU will undermine the Nato alliance. Yet growing awareness of the political paralysis wrought by Brexit may have had one unexpected spin-off – a rise in support for EU membership here, where recorded levels of Euroscepticism have often matched, or even surpassed, those in Britain. “It’s not a coincidence that support for the EU, although still under 40%, has risen in the last two years and one of the reasons is the mess we see in London,” says Ondřej Houska, a European affairs specialist with the daily Hospodářské newspaper. “If we’d voted for Czexit, I could have expected to see this in Prague. But Britain has never experienced totalitarianism, its civil service is world class, its political elite went to Oxford and Cambridge – so we’re amazed at their inability to agree on anything.” Robert Tait In the days after the Brexit vote, Britons would remark that the Germans must be positively swimming in schadenfreude, after we had caused so much trouble in the EU. But among the people I spoke to – government spokespeople, supermarket cashiers, diplomats and taxi drivers – the overwhelming emotions were sadness and disappointment. A diplomat likens his melancholy to that of being dumped by a girlfriend. “I still have her jumper and I go round wearing it, hoping her scent will linger,” he says. He clings to the positive aspects of a Britain he cherished – from punk music to humour – and almost breaks into song: “They can’t take that away from me.” Germans are also resigned – if frustrated - by British misperceptions, from Boris Johnson’s claims that a “German-led” EU is pursuing a Hitlerian superstate to the notion that Berlin would force the EU to submit to the UK’s Brexit demands in order to save the German car industry. They are also immune to the British tabloids’ assertions that Germany is morally indebted to Britain for the defeat of Hitler, and so should throw Theresa May a lifeline. It’s a sign of the affection many Germans harbour for the UK that such feelings have not been dented. Even in their Brexit bewilderment, Germans still love holidaying in the UK, savour our lively parliamentary debate and obsess over the royals. But increasingly, they are coping with Brexit by separating Britain into two entities: cultural and political. Many kick themselves that they did not see it coming; some ask what what they can do to help reverse it. But not everyone. A professor of risk assessment tells me the path to Brexit was long clear in Britain’s difficult relationship with the EU. “I think it is time Britain left now,” he says. “It doesn’t help anyone, least of all the British, for them to stay in.” I am one of thousands of Britons living here to have taken German citizenship since the referendum. My book on the process, Exit Brexit, has had an overwhelming response. That a Brit is prepared to embrace historically tarred Germany, in the way lots of Germans have embraced Britain, astonishes many. “If Brexit doesn’t happen, will you keep your German passport?” one interviewer asked. I assured her I have no intention of giving it up. Kate Connolly Poland’s attitude towards Britain might be characterised as largely affectionate – but with an edge. Brexit is not helping. The wartime alliance is remembered in Poland as much in terms of British betrayals as of Polish pilots and the Enigma machine. Resentment eased during the cold war thanks to Britain’s role as a key adversary of communist Poland’s Soviet overlords, and the emergence – incongruously, for many – of Margaret Thatcher as a heroine of the Polish proletariat. At first, the large-scale migration of Poles– admired for their work ethic and almost universally accepted – to the UK in the 2000s appeared to herald a golden age in relations between the two nations. Many Britons assume the new arrivals were motivated exclusively by money, but many were also attracted by modern British multiculturalism. “I loved the freedom. I remember thinking: ‘This is it! This is my place on earth,’” a Polish woman who moved to the UK in 1999 tells me. That love of Britain has only intensified the pain of rejection after the Brexit vote. Complicating matters further, it is increasingly apparent that many other Poles living in the UK never accepted Britain’s multicultural model in the first place. Feeling rejected and economically exploited, the Polish community is increasingly a recruiting ground for the far right in both countries. There are of course many Poles who still live perfectly happily in the UK, and will continue to do so. But the feeling that they are now being rejected, having once been welcomed, is leading to the return of some old resentments. For many, the love affair with Britain is turning sour. Christian Davies   
Chief negotiator Olly Robbins was overheard in a Brussels bar, discussing strategy   Theresa May’s high-stakes Brexit strategy may have been accidentally revealed after her chief negotiator Olly Robbins was overheard in a Brussels bar saying MPs will be given a last-minute choice between her deal and a lengthy delay. The prime minister has repeatedly insisted that the government intends to leave the EU as planned on 29 March, and urged MPs to “hold our nerve”, while she tries to renegotiate changes to the Irish backstop. “So our work continues,” she told MPs on Tuesday. “Having secured an agreement with the European Union for further talks, we now need some time to complete that process. The talks are at a crucial stage. We now all need to hold our nerve to get the changes this house requires and deliver Brexit on time.” But Robbins, the most senior civil servant involved in the Brexit process, was overheard by a reporter from ITV, holding a late-night conversation in which he appeared to suggest she would wait until March – and then give MPs the choice between backing her, or accepting a long extension to article 50. According to the broadcaster, Robbins said the government had “got to make them believe that the week beginning end of March ... extension is possible, but if they don’t vote for the deal then the extension is a long one.” The tactic appears to be aimed squarely at members of the backbench Tory European Research Group (ERG), who may fear Brexit could ultimately be cancelled altogether, if MPs accept a delay. “The issue is whether Brussels is clear on the terms of extension,” Robbins was overheard saying. “In the end they will probably just give us an extension.” On the backstop, Robbins appeared to confirm that the government’s initial plan was for the backstop, which effectively keeps the UK in a customs union, to form a temporary “bridge” to the long-term trading relationship. “The big clash all along is the ‘safety net’,” Robbins said. “We agreed a bridge but it came out as a ‘safety net’.” Former Department for Exiting the European Union (DExEU) minister Steve Baker played down the leak, saying “as a consummate civil servant, Mr Robbins is likely to be appalled by this story. Officials advise. Ministers decide. What matters ultimately is the policy of the prime minister and the cabinet.” But another senior Brexiter said “the trouble with Mr Robbins is that he is a draughts player in a chess world”. Robbins’ revealing remarks are likely to embolden those ministers who are increasingly anxious about the threat of a no-deal Brexit. Several are privately signalling they are prepared to consider resigning in a fortnight’s time to ensure the success of cross-party efforts to force May’s hand, rather than allow her to continue gambling on a last-minute change of heart by Brexiter rebels. A government spokesman said “we don’t propose to comment on alleged remarks from a private conversation. The government’s focus is on securing the improvements parliament needs to pass a deal so we leave the EU on 29 March”. But Robbins’ overheard comments chimed with remarks from the leader of the House of Commons, Andrea Leadsom, who refused to deny on Tuesday morning that the Commons could be denied a “meaningful vote”, until after the next scheduled European council meeting, which is due to be held on 21 March. “The prime minister is seeking to bring back the meaningful vote just as soon as possible,” Leadsom told BBC Radio 4’s Today programme. “So it is a negotiation. It’s not possible to predict the future.” However, if she seeks to delay until March, May is likely to face a fierce backlash from MPs, including some junior ministers, who believe every day of uncertainty increases the risks to jobs and businesses. One senior backbencher said there was “a palpable sense that the longer this drags on, the more the prime minister has to have a specific proposal that can win over the ERG, which seems unlikely, or cross-party support for a deal. If not, she’ll face mass resignations and another leadership crisis”. Another senior Conservative said: “It’s an utter tragedy that no-deal is still on the table. Cowards in the cabinet sit there updating Instagram, pretending everything is okay while we go through this bullshit parade. They’re lying to the British public and history will damn them forever.” Jeremy Corbyn accused May of playing for time and having no plan. “Our country is facing the biggest crisis in a generation, and yet this prime minister continues to recklessly run down the clock,” he said. But May, in turn, blamed Labour for increasing uncertainty by failing to support her deal. Robbins’ reported comments emerged after May cleared the way for a nerve-shredding, last-minute vote for her deal, by announcing that the government would seek to exclude the Brexit deal from the usual 21-day process under which parliament approves international treaties. MPs are due to vote on Thursday on a government motion, reaffirming their conditional acceptance of May’s deal, if she secures changes to the controversial backstop. When the Valentine’s Day vote was first mooted, it was regarded as a fresh opportunity for MPs to rule out no deal. But a cross-party group of MPs led by Labour’s Yvette Cooper, has opted not to table an amendment seeking to force the government to extend article 50, believing Conservative backbenchers are willing to give the prime minister another fortnight to continue negotiations in Brussels. Instead they published a revised bill, backed by senior Conservatives Caroline Spelman and Oliver Letwin, aimed at preventing no deal – and promised to table an amendment on 27 February, forcing the government to make time to pass it. “This bill creates a parliamentary safeguard to prevent us drifting into no deal by accident, and to prevent those crucial decisions being left until the final fortnight. The risks to jobs, the NHS and security from no deal are too great for us to stand back and let the government drift,” Cooper said. The new amendment is likely to be the vehicle for Conservative MPs keen to prevent the prime minister from running down the clock and increasing the risk of an “accidental” no-deal Brexit. Labour has tabled its own amendment to Thursday’s vote, putting in black and white her pledge to hold another amendable vote by 27 February, if she has not secured support for her deal by then.
PM heads to Brussels as Philip Hammond declares ‘Malthouse compromise’ unviable    Theresa May will present the EU with new legal proposals to solve the Irish backstop issue on Wednesday, which Downing Street hopes will be enough to convince Eurosceptics to back her Brexit deal. The chancellor, Philip Hammond, confirmed late on Tuesday that the government no longer intended to pursue alternative arrangements for the backstop in the withdrawal agreement, which had been championed by cross-factional MPs including Eurosceptic Steve Baker and soft Brexiter Nicky Morgan. Instead, the prime minister is travelling to Brussels to meet Jean-Claude Juncker, the European commission president, with a plan to secure legal assurances that the backstop would not permanently bind the UK into a customs union. She was forced to admit to Conservative MPs who met her on Tuesday night that the Irish backstop could not be replaced by the “Malthouse compromise” – proposals for a free trade agreement with as-yet-unknown technology to avoid customs checks on the Irish border. However, she stressed that this solution would still be examined in future to help solve the issue of customs arrangements at the Irish border. Hammond confirmed that the Malthouse compromise was no longer a viable option in a speech to the Make UK dinner held by the manufacturers’ association EEF on Tuesday night. He called the plan a “valuable effort” that should be looked at again during the transition period, but said it could not provide a solution now. “It is clear that the EU will not consider replacing the backstop with such an alternative arrangement now, in order to address our immediate challenge,” he said, adding that the alternative arrangement would “require significant changes to EU legislation and customs practices that would need to be negotiated with the EU member states and others”.  No 10 had been hoping to secure a renegotiated withdrawal agreement and put this to parliament next week, but senior sources acknowledged time was running out. Hammond hinted the vote could still come next week, saying that “over the next few days, Members of Parliament need to think long and hard about the choice before them.”  The Malthouse compromise was named after the housing minister, Kit Malthouse, who helped draft it as an attempt to find a Brexit deal the warring sides of the Tory party could back. The most hardline Eurosceptics have repeatedly said they will only support May’s deal if the compromise is written into the EU withdrawal agreement to replace the backstop – the mechanism that would keep the UK in a customs union if there were no solution to the Irish border. However, Jacob Rees-Mogg and Steve Baker insisted the Malthouse agreement was “still live and kicking” and said they looked forward to further developments. No 10 appears to be placing its hopes for breaking the deadlock with the EU on legal assurances that the Irish backstop potentially binding the UK into a customs union would not be permanent. Stephen Barclay, the Brexit secretary, held talks on Monday with the EU’s chief Brexit negotiator, Michel Barnier. He is understood to have warned Barnier that the consequence of the deal not passing would result either in a no-deal or in parliament taking control of events, adding extra uncertainty and difficulty to the UK-EU negotiations. If May and Juncker can agree a possible way forward on Wednesday night, officials will then start work on the technical and legal practicalities. The goal is for Geoffrey Cox, the attorney general, to be able to change his legal advice to the government, which currently states that the backstop could mean a permanent customs union. Cox is expected to give a speech later this week setting out his thinking. At a press conference in Stuttgart on Tuesday, Juncker played down expectations over his meeting with May. He said: “There isn’t enough movement for me to be able to expect this to be a discussion with a concrete outcome.” “I don’t know what Mrs May will communicate to me tomorrow,” he said, adding that he was unsure what “our British friends would actually like to have”. The gap between the expectations in parliament and the reality of the talks in Brussels was made clear on Tuesday by the European commission’s chief spokesman ahead of May’s visit. Asked about Barnier’s two-hour meeting with Barclay and Cox on Monday, the spokesman said: “We cannot accept a time limit to the backstop or a unilateral exit clause and further talks will be held this week to see whether a way through can be found that could gain the broadest possible support in the UK parliament and respect the guidelines agreed by the European council.” EU sources expressed frustration that they were having to “re-educate” Cox, who is new to the talks, about the lack of realism in the central demands made by May. Sources said Barnier and his deputy, Sabine Weyand, had been “forensic” in their dismantling of the Malthouse compromise on Monday. Barnier told Barclay that suspending EU law on the border was not a viable solution to the problem. Weyand later privately lamented that the EU was having to repeat arguments to Cox first made in August 2017. Officials are looking at translating into legal text the previous commitments by Juncker, and his European council counterpart, Donald Tusk, about the temporary nature of the backstop, and their intention to work on a technological solution to supercede the backstop in the future. But officials are sceptical that such a move would satisfy the Democratic Unionist party or the Tory Brexiters, who had been led to believe the withdrawal agreement would be reopened in order to win their support. With the negotiations at an impasse, the foreign secretary, Jeremy Hunt, is expected to appeal to Brussels to help the UK come up with a solution during a visit to Berlin. Between talks with the German foreign and finance ministers, Heiko Maas and Peter Altmaier, Hunt is expected to warn that failure to ratify the withdrawal agreement will be “deeply damaging, economically and politically”. “In the vital weeks ahead, standing back and hoping that Brexit solves itself will not be enough”, Hunt will say. “The stakes are just too high: we must all do what we can to ensure such a deal is reached. At this momentous time, a heavy responsibility falls upon all of us. We do not want historians in the future to puzzle over our actions and ask themselves how it was that Europe failed to achieve an amicable change in its relationship with Britain – a country that is not simply a partner but a friend and ally in every possible sense.” With time running out, cabinet was also updated on the option of a no-deal Brexit if May cannot get her withdrawal agreement approved by parliament. One cabinet source said only Liz Truss, the secretary to the Treasury, spoke up emphatically in favour of keeping no deal as a negotiating option. “I can’t understand how a No 2 at the Treasury could still countenance keeping that on the table,” the cabinet source said, but added that the general mood in the room had noticeably turned against no deal as a negotiating tactic.
Letter offers Labour’s support if PM makes five binding commitments – including joining a customs union   Jeremy Corbyn has written to the prime minister, offering to throw Labour’s support behind her Brexit deal if she makes five legally binding commitments – including joining a customs union. The Labour leader held private talks with Theresa May last week for the first time since her deal was rejected by a historic margin of 230 votes in January. In a follow-up letter sent on Wednesday, he laid out in the clearest terms yet what commitments he is seeking in exchange for offering Labour support. A customs union is an agreement by a group of countries, such as the EU, to all apply the same tariffs on imported goods from the rest of the world and, typically, eliminate tariffs entirely for trade within the group. By doing this, they can help avoid the need for costly and time-consuming customs checks during trade between members of the union. Asian shipping containers arriving at Felixstowe or Rotterdam, for example, need only pass through customs once before their contents head to markets all over Europe. Lorries passing between Dover and Calais avoid delay entirely. Customs are not the only checks that count – imports are also scrutinised for conformity with trading standards regulations and security and immigration purposes – but they do play an important role in determining how much friction there is at the border.  His intervention will dismay backbench Labour MPs and grassroots activists still hoping he will switch the party’s policy towards demanding a second Brexit referendum – which is not mentioned in the letter. And it comes as No 10 prepares to publish legislation underpinning workers’ rights, perhaps as early as next week, in an attempt to win support from Labour backbenchers. In his letter, Corbyn calls for the government to rework the political declaration setting the framework for Britain’s future relationship with the EU – and then enshrine these new negotiating objectives in UK law, so that a future Tory leader could not sweep them away after Brexit. He says the changes to the political declaration must include: A “permanent and comprehensive UK-wide customs union”, including a say in future trade deals. Close alignment with the single market, underpinned by “shared institutions”. “Dynamic alignment on rights and protections”, so that UK standards do not fall behind those of the EU. Clear commitments on future UK participation in EU agencies and funding programmes. Unambiguous agreements on future security arrangements, such as use of the European arrest warrant. There is no mention of the second of the shadow Brexit secretary Keir Starmer’s six tests, which said that Labour would not support any deal that failed to deliver the “exact same benefits” as single market and customs union membership. Labour’s approach, which Corbyn called “constructive”, appears to be focused firmly on the forward-looking political declaration, rather than the 585-page withdrawal agreement, which contains the Irish backstop and the divorce bill. “We recognise that your priority is now to seek legally binding changes to the backstop arrangements contained within the withdrawal agreement, as we discussed when we met,” Corbyn writes. “However, without changes to your negotiating red lines, we do not believe that simply seeking modifications to the existing backstop terms is a credible or sufficient response either to the scale of your defeat last month in parliament, or the need for a deal with the EU that can bring the country together and protect jobs,” he says. He does not explicitly say that article 50 should be extended – a move that the shadow foreign secretary, Emily Thornberry, described as “sensible” on Wednesday. But he said that because of the government’s negotiating failures “time has run out for the necessary preparation and for legislation to be finalised”. He added: “Following last week’s rejection by the House of Commons of no deal, all necessary steps must be taken to avoid such an outcome.” He concluded: “My colleagues and I look forward to discussing these proposals with you further, in the constructive manner in which they are intended, with the aim of securing a sensible agreement that can win the support of parliament and bring the country together.” May has so far vehemently resisted the prospect of reopening the political declaration, focusing instead on securing changes to the Irish backstop, which has been the flashpoint for Brexiter Conservative MPs. But at the same time, her government has been trying to win over Labour backbenchers with new legally binding promises on workers’ rights. She could propose a new draft bill as early as next week guaranteeing that UK workers’ rights will keep pace with Europe. Backbench Labour sources said the new bill was in the late stages of drafting and would include a “regression lock” that the UK parliament would ensure workers’ rights would never slip below European standards. That approach appears likely to come close to meeting one of Corbyn’s five tests. Multiple Labour MPs who have met May over the past few months have made it clear to her that they needed the guarantees to be made in primary legislation – because they do not trust that May will remain in No 10 for much longer. Those who are in negotiations with the government have insisted that the bill must be tabled and have had at least one day of second reading within the next few months. The Labour MP John Mann, one of the key figures behind the push for legislation, said: “There needs to be a bill produced soon. We aren’t basing anything on a promise, with all due respect to the prime minister. We are doing it based on statute.” The Labour MP Lisa Nandy, who has also intimated she could back May’s deal, said the right offer from No 10 could win over up to 60 Labour MPs. “If she were able to come back, and stop this eternal circular conversation within the Tory Party, and start reaching out to the rest of parliament and the rest of the country and give us those assurances, I think you’d get somewhere between 40 and 60 Labour [MPs] who would be prepared to step forward and say: we’ve got to come together around this, otherwise we leave with no deal,” Nandy told BBC Radio 5 Live. But Phil Wilson, the Labour MP for Sedgefield and a leading supporter of the People’s Vote campaign, said: “It was perhaps inevitable that at some point my party would publish something like this even though most Labour MPs, members and voters have long since worked out that there is no form of Brexit that can meet the promises made in 2016 or do anything but make people poorer … In the end there is only one way out of this mess for both our country and the Labour party – a people’s vote.” Trade unions are understood to have been pushing for the legislation to include an easing of restrictions on union activity. Union leaders had been seeking more concrete proposals for regulation of the labour market after Brexit and the enforcement of existing law. “Their desire to bring in seasonal agricultural workers from around the globe, as well as barista visas, really does ring alarm bells,” one union source said. “Our fear is that when workers depend on their bosses for their visas, exploitation is sure to follow.”
Cold war plans revived to move royals to safe locations away from London if unrest follows no deal Reuters  British officials have revived cold war emergency plans to relocate the royal family should there be riots in London if Britain suffers a disruptive departure from the European Union, two Sunday newspapers have reported. “These emergency evacuation plans have been in existence since the cold war but have now been repurposed in the event of civil disorder following a no-deal Brexit,” the Sunday Times said, quoting an unnamed source from the government’s Cabinet Office, which handles sensitive administrative issues. The Mail on Sunday also said it had learnt of plans to move the royal family, including Queen Elizabeth, to safe locations away from London. In January an annual speech by the Queen, 92, to a women’s group was widely interpreted in Britain as a call for politicians to reach agreement over Brexit. Jacob Rees-Mogg, a Conservative MP and keen supporter of Brexit, told the Mail on Sunday he believed the plans showed unnecessary panic by officials over a no-deal Brexit as senior royals had remained in London during bombing in the second world war. But the Sunday Times said an ex-police officer formerly in charge of royal protection, Dai Davies, expected Queen Elizabeth would be moved out of London if there was unrest. “If there were problems in London, clearly you would remove the royal family away from those key sites,” Davies was quoted as saying. 
The FA wants to see more English and fewer foreign players in the Premier League. Here’s how each team could be affected    Brexit-anxiety has engulfed businesses across the UK over the past few months, and when it comes to English football, the Premier League is not shielded from the uncertainty. For decades, England’s top tier has become increasingly international, with clubs sourcing the best talent from around the world. But this has meant playing time has been reduced for English players, something that hasn’t sat well with the game’s governing body. The FA sees Brexit as a chance to increase the number of English players in the Premier League, which it says will boost the chances of the national team by exposing more players to the best football. But the Premier League has rejected this view, saying there is “no evidence” it would work. As part of their plan, the FA has called for a cut in the maximum number of non-homegrown players allowed in each team’s 25-player squad from 17 to 12. A “homegrown” player is currently defined as one that’s been registered with the FA for at least three years before they turn 21, regardless of nationality. It’s a rule that’s allowed Manchester United’s Paul Pogba to qualify as homegrown, because he first signed at Old Trafford as a 16-year-old. The FA is also considering reducing this age by which players must have three years of association with the FA to 18. While plenty of negotiations between the FA and the Premier League remain, few teams would be unaffected by the rule changes floated. The Premier League’s on-the-pitch-product has led to enormous value off-the pitch, and the Premier League is by far the richest league in the world with revenues reaching £4.5bn for 2016-17. Additionally, eight of the world’s 20 richest clubs are English, and the Premier League fears that stricter quotas on non-homegrown players would hit those clubs by making them less competitive.  Brexit could mean players from EU and European Economic Area countries are subject to the same, visa and work permit restrictions as players from countries outside the EU, making the criteria for signing players stricter and making it harder for teams to trade.  This year’s January transfer window was noticeably slower compared to a year ago, which could signal, among other reasons, that teams are keeping a watchful eye on Brexit developments, and are reluctant to spend large sums of money on players they may be forced to sell. In the bigger picture, the managers are themselves divided. Jürgen Klopp, the Liverpool manager, said Brexit “makes no sense”. But on the other hand Neil Warnock, manager of Premier League Cardiff City, said he couldn’t wait to get out of the EU. With just 43 days until the UK is due to leave the EU, time is running out for the FA to find a balanced deal that not only promotes the prospects of English players, but also one that protects the immense wealth of its prized asset, the Premier League.  
PM defeated by 303 votes to 258, plunging hopes of uniting her party around renegotiated deal into chaos   Theresa May has suffered an embarrassing defeat at the hands of hardline Eurosceptics, plunging her hopes of uniting the Conservatives around a renegotiated Brexit deal into chaos. The prime minister failed to win support for her EU strategy after the European Research Group (ERG), led by Jacob Rees-Mogg, abstained on a government motion because it appeared to rule out a no-deal Brexit. The defeat marks the end of a temporary truce over Brexit among Conservative MPs, who had voted last month in favour of May’s strategy if she could obtain some concessions from Brussels on the issue of the Northern Ireland backstop. The prime minister was not present for the House of Commons defeat, by 303 votes to 258, in which she again lost control of her party in the crucial final weeks before Britain is due to leave the EU on 29 March. It is likely to cause fresh doubt in Brussels that May has the power to win parliament’s support for an amended EU withdrawal agreement. The Eurosceptic refusal to cooperate with No 10 underlined the difficulty the prime minister is likely to face in securing concessions from the EU that will satisfy them. In Brussels, diplomats said the result confirmed that the prime minister was incapable of commanding the support of her party on key votes, and that she needed to work cross-party. “No one can take any good from this,” said one diplomat. The vote is not binding but it appeared to be a show of strength by around 60 MPs in the ERG, which included Boris Johnson, the former foreign secretary; Dominic Raab, the former Brexit secretary; and Steve Baker, the former Brexit minister. A small number of pro-EU MPs also refused to back the motion. Senior figures in the ERG used the result to increase pressure on the government to adopt the so-called Malthouse compromise – a proposal to use unspecified technology to avoid customs checks at the Irish border – which the EU appears likely to reject. Many in the ERG would be equally happy to see a no-deal Brexit. No 10 played down the significance of the vote and insisted that May understood the concerns of the ERG. However, that appeared only to infuriate many remain-supporting Tories who are determined to block a no-deal Brexit. The government offered a separate concession to remain-supporting Tory MP Anna Soubry that it would publish some papers relating to the impact of a no-deal Brexit. However, one ERG source said the group was unconcerned about this because the public paid no attention to “project fear” at the referendum.  Nick Boles, a former government minister, said the vote should be a wake-up call to May that she cannot rely on the ERG’s support. “Maybe, just maybe, the penny will now drop with prime minister and her chief whip that the hardliners in the ERG want a no-deal Brexit and will stop at nothing to get it,” he said. “Responsible MPs of all parties must come together on 27 and 28 March and stop them.” In an escalation of tensions, Richard Harrington, one of May’s business ministers, even suggested MPs in the ERG should join Ukip. “The prime minister has done a pretty good job of standing up to them up till now, but they were drinking champagne to celebrate her losing her deal and I regard that as being treachery,” he told the House magazine. “I read that Nigel Farage is setting up a new party called ‘Brexit’ and if I were them I’d be looking at that, because that seems to reflect their views more than the Conservative party does. They should read carefully what that party’s got to offer, because in my view they’re not Conservatives. “There are people who are very solid and stringent in their views and if I were they I would be looking at a party that seems designed for them – Nigel Farage’s party.” He also dismissed the Malthouse compromise as “fanciful nonsense”. May had previously said that she had “a substantial and sustainable majority” among MPs for her approach, after parliament voted in January for her to seek “alternative arrangements” to the Northern Ireland backstop from the EU and separately against a no-deal Brexit. The government motion simply restated parliament’s position, but the hardline Eurosceptics balked at the idea of endorsing a strategy that takes a no-deal Brexit off the table. MPs will next get a chance to debate and vote on May’s EU strategy on 27 February. The Labour leader, Jeremy Corbyn, demanded that May come to the House of Commons to explain her Brexit plan in the absence of parliamentary support for her approach. “Tonight’s vote shows there is no majority for the prime minister’s course of action in dealing with Brexit,” he said. “Yet again her government has been defeated. The government cannot keen on ignoring parliament or ploughing on towards 29 March without a coherent plan.” No 10, however, simply issued a statement saying that May understood the concerns of her Conservative colleagues. Downing Street had always insisted that it never intended to remove the option of pursing a no deal Brexit. “While we didn’t secure the support of the Commons this evening, the prime minister continues to believe, and the debate itself indicated, that far from objecting to securing changes to the backstop that will allow us to leave with a deal, there was a concern from some Conservative colleagues about taking no deal off the table at this stage,” the statement said. “The motion on 29 January remains the only one the House of Commons has passed expressing what it does want, and that is legally binding changes to address concerns about the backstop. The government will continue to pursue this with the EU to ensure we leave on time on 29 March.” May also attempted to shift some blame on to Labour, saying its failure to support her motion made the prospect of leaving the EU without a deal more likely. Labour sources said panicking Conservative whips had discussed the possibility with them of accepting a Labour motion and voting with the opposition in order to avoid an embarrassing defeat. Ultimately, however, they decided to accept a humiliating loss rather than appear to join forces with the opposition. Labour also suffered a split as 41 backbench rebels voted with the SNP to delay Brexit. Those defying the party whip included Chuka Umunna, Chris Leslie, David Lammy, Luciana Berger and Margaret Hodge. They were joined by two pro-EU Conservatives – Ken Clarke and Sarah Wollaston.
Prime minister promises to hold vote by 12 March in move that will deepen cabinet splits MPs may have to wait until 12 March for a meaningful vote on the government’s final Brexit deal, Theresa May has said in an intervention that will deepen splits in her cabinet. The prime minister confirmed on Sunday that she would not hold the vote this week as she flew to Sharm el-Sheikh in Egypt, where she is due to discuss Brexit on the margins of an EU summit with Arab leaders. It is a critical week for May, with many in the House of Commons having been expecting to vote on her deal. Without a reworked withdrawal agreement to bring back to MPs, she has promised to table an amendable motion, which will allow backbenchers another chance to try to block a no-deal Brexit. May said: “My team will be back in Brussels on Tuesday. As a result of that, we won’t bring a meaningful vote to parliament this week, but we will ensure that that happens by 12 March. But it’s still within our grasp to leave the EU by the 29 March and that is what we are planning to do.” Amber Rudd, the work and pensions secretary, is among three cabinet ministers who have publicly threatened to defy the prime minister by backing an effort to force the government to extend article 50 if no deal is agreed by mid-March. Rudd published a public statement on Saturday with David Gauke, the justice secretary, and the business secretary, Greg Clark, warning about the risks of a no-deal Brexit. May has imposed a 12 March deadline for a vote because it should be held before the chancellor’s spring statement on 13 March, Downing Street sources said. May brushed off calls to change course. “What we see around the cabinet table are strong views on the issue of Europe. What we are doing as a government is ensuring we are doing everything we can to leave the Europe Union with a deal,” she said. “People are talking about the extension of article 50 as if it solves the issue when of course it won’t. It defers the point of decision. There comes a point when we must make that decision.” Asked what she would do if she lost the meaningful vote, she said: “Why is it that people are always trying to look for the next thing after the next thing after the next thing? “It is pointless, we should focus on what we are doing now, which is working to get a deal and bring that deal to a meaningful vote, which I want to see passed by the House of Commons and leave on 29 March.” Asked about the open defiance from the three cabinet ministers who have threatened to resign, she said: “I have recognised and others have recognised that there are strong views that are held on this issue. What we are collectively doing as a government and as a cabinet is working to get that deal. “Parliament wants to see changes to the backstop. We have been working with the EU on that. Our focus is on leaving with a deal. My intention is to work with a deal.” In a separate development, May pledged £200m to help victims of the war in Yemen as she arrived in Egypt. “We are playing our part and will continue to do so but there is still more that we as an international community can do,” she said. “At the summit in Egypt, I will call on our partners in Europe and the region to continue to provide the aid that is so desperately needed.” May is due to meet a Saudi delegation on Sunday and is expected to also raise the killing of the journalist Jamal Khashoggi. Brexit will not be on the official agenda at the inaugural meeting of the EU-Arab League conference, but May is expected to hold meetings with the European council president, Donald Tusk, later on Sunday and Angela Merkel on Monday.
Seaborne Freight had won £13.8m contract despite never having run Channel service   A controversial no-deal Brexit ferry contract awarded to a firm with no ships has been cancelled by the Department for Transport after an Irish shipping firm that had been secretly backing the deal pulled out. The decision by the transport secretary, Chris Grayling, to award Seaborne Freight a contract worth £13.8m had attracted widespread criticism and ridicule. It was one of three firms awarded contracts totalling £108m in late December to lay on additional crossings from Ramsgate to ease the pressure on Dover when Britain leaves the EU, despite the company having never run a Channel service. The department said on Friday it had decided to terminate the contract after Arklow Shipping, which had backed Seaborne Freight, stepped away from the deal. A DfT spokeswoman said: “Following the decision of Seaborne Freight’s backer, Arklow Shipping, to step back from the deal, it became clear Seaborne would not reach its contractual requirements with the government. We have therefore decided to terminate our agreement. “The government is already in advanced talks with a number of companies to secure additional freight capacity – including through the port of Ramsgate – in the event of a no-deal Brexit.” The contract was cancelled a day after Grayling contacted Thanet district council to ask it to postpone a budget that would have shut down parts of the port of Ramsgate for use by freight shipping. Keeping the site open is costing local taxpayers £7,224 a day, according to a local source, and the council – which has already spent months in fruitless negotiations with Seaborne – had proposed shutting it down to help balance the books. The DfT persuaded the council to keep it open, claiming that talks with Seaborne were at an “advanced stage”, according to Paul Messenger, a local Conservative councillor. Labour have claimed that which he was in government Chris Grayling's mistakes have cost the economy and taxpayers over £2.7bn. Here are five of Grayling's biggest failings: In 2010 Grayling was forced to apologise after a recording captured him saying that people who ran bed and breakfasts in their homes should have the right to turn away gay couples.  Grayling introduced a ban on prisoners receiving books from friends or relatives, and limited the number of books each prisoner was able to have in a cell. A high court ruling in December 2015 found that the measure was unlawful and it was subsequently scrapped. Grayling was transport secretary when a change to rail timetables caused chaos, leading to the cancellation of thousands of services. More than one in 10 Northern and Thameslink trains were cancelled after the introduction of the new timetables on 20 May 2018. The rail regulator criticised Grayling's DfT for failing to question the industry’s assurances about the risk of disruption. Grayling was widely mocked after awarding Seaborne Freight a no-deal Brexit ferry contract despite the company not owning any ships and having never previously operated a ferry service. It emerged that Seaborne's website had copied their legal terms and conditions from a pizza delivery service. The contract was cancelled in February 2019. The government subsequently had to agree a new £33m contract with Eurotunnel to settle legal action. Failings by the Ministry of Justice in the part-privatisation of probation services will cost taxpayers at least £171m, according to a National Audit Office (NAO). Under Grayling, in 2013, the ministry created 21 community rehabilitation companies (CRCs) to manage low- and medium-risk offenders with the aim of cutting reoffending rates and costs. The NAO found that while there has been a 2.5% reduction in the proportion of offenders proven to have committed another crime between 2011 and March 2017, the number of offences per reoffender has increased by 22%. Haroon Siddique He said the port was costing about £2m a year: “That’s why we haven’t got any road sweepers, that’s why we haven’t got any public lavatories.” Questions remain about the viability of Ramsgate’s port for use post-Brexit. It can only accommodate ships up to 180 metres long, but modern ships are typically 230-250 metres to allow for the economies of scale that make them sustainable. John Davis, a member of the Ramsgate Action Group, said: “You can’t run a double-decker bus service out of a single-storey garage on the side of a bungalow – that’s the problem.” The government’s deal with Seaborne descended into farce at the beginning of January when it emerged that the company had copied and pasted the terms and conditions from what appeared to be a pizza delivery company on to its website. Several weeks later, the transport select committee published correspondence with Grayling in which he brushed off a number of questions about the procurement process that had led to the contract with Seaborne, as well as allegations that the government may have acted illegally by failing to put the deal out to tender. Grayling insisted last month that the Seaborne Freight contract was “not a risk”. The DfT said it had been Arklow Shipping’s backing that gave it confidence in the viability of the deal, and that it stood by the due diligence carried out on Seaborne Freight. It said no taxpayer money had been transferred to the company. The shadow communities secretary, Andrew Gwynne, told BBC Radio 4’s Today programme: “It’s just another example of a major disaster on the hands of Chris Grayling, who actually must now really class as the worst secretary of state ever.” Andy McDonald MP, the shadow transport secretary, said the cancellation had been foreseen by his party and could not go without consequence. “Whilst Theresa May needs the few friends she has right now, we cannot have this incompetent transport secretary carry on heaping humiliation after humiliation on our country. He has to go.” The Labour leader, Jeremy Corbyn, raised the “ludicrous situation” in a speech in Coventry on Saturday, saying: “Chris Grayling … claimed the government had ‘looked very carefully’ at Seaborne Freight before giving the company the contract, but apparently not carefully enough to notice that it didn’t have any ships. Chris Grayling does have form in other departments.” Mick Cash, the general secretary of the Rail, Maritime and Transport union, said: “RMT has taken a number of protests over the fiasco of the government’s Brexit ferry contracts to both the Department for Transport and the ports, and [this] comes as no surprise to us. “The whole exercise is a complete and utter shambles, with the government ignoring union calls on what needs to happen. Instead they are blundering on from crisis to crisis.” A Department for International Trade spokesperson said: “Our priority is to avoid disruption to businesses as we leave the EU and more DIT staff have been allocated to no-deal planning.”
Election also on the cards after MPs reject withdrawal agreement by 58 votes   Theresa May hopes to bring her Brexit deal back to parliament again next week after it was rejected for a third time by MPs – and appears poised to trigger a general election if parliament fails to agree a way forward. Despite the embattled prime minister’s dramatic promise on Wednesday that she would hand over the keys to 10 Downing Street if her Tory colleagues backed the withdrawal agreement, parliament voted against it on Friday, by 344 to 286. The Commons vote was held on the day when Britain was meant to be leaving the European Union, as Parliament Square outside overflowed with raucous pro-Brexit protesters. A string of leave-supporting Conservative backbenchers who had twice rejected the deal, including Boris Johnson, Jacob Rees-Mogg and former Brexit secretary Dominic Raab, switched sides to support the agreement. But with Labour unwilling to shift its position, and the Democratic Unionist party’s 10 MPs implacably opposed, it was not enough to secure a majority for May. The result was a sense of stunned disbelief in Westminster. Asked what could happen next, one government source said: “Last one out, turn off the lights.” Immediately after the defeat was announced, May told MPs: “The implications of the house’s decision are grave. The legal default now is that the United Kingdom is due to leave the European Union on 12 April. In just 14 days’ time.” Under the deal agreed by EU leaders in Brussels last week, if May had passed her withdrawal agreement this week, Brexit would have been delayed until 22 May. Now, she will have to return to Brussels for an emergency European council summit on 10 April. The EU27 expect her to ask for a longer delay – requiring Britain to participate in the European elections in May – or accept a no-deal Brexit two days later. However, her aides hope the 22 May date could still be in play if her deal is accepted next week. Theresa May will take her final session of prime minister's questions before offering her resignation to the Queen. Her successor will then take over as prime minister.  The final sitting day in the Commons before it breaks for the summer recess. Brecon and Radnorshire byelection. Tory candidate Chris Davies is seeking to regain the seat he was ousted from by a recall petition triggered in the wake of his conviction for submitting false expenses claims. If he fails, the new prime minister's working majority in the Commons will be cut to just three.  G7 summit in Biarritz. The new prime minister's first appearance at a major global summit. Donald Trump will be among the world leaders at the gathering, potentially providing the opportunity for a meeting with the controversial US president in an effort to highlight the importance of the special relationship and a future trade deal.  The UN general assembly meeting in New York will provide another opportunity for the new prime minister to appear on the global stage and set out their vision for the country's place in the world.  Conservative party conference. The gathering in Manchester will be a key test of the new Tory leader's ability to unite the party and provides a platform to use their closing speech to address the nation.  The deadline for reaching a Brexit deal. Unless there is a further extension, this will be the UK's last day as a member of the European Union and it will leave, with or without an agreement. May did not spell out explicitly what she planned to do next, saying only that she would press ahead with an “orderly Brexit”. However, it became increasingly clear after the vote that Downing Street does not believe the deal is dead. The prime minister pointed to MPs’ plans to hold a second round of indicative votes on Monday, “to see if there is a stable majority for a particular alternative version of our future relationship with the EU”. But she told MPs: “I fear we are reaching the limits of this process in this house.” Many regarded that as a warning that if they supported an option she was not prepared to implement, or failed to reach agreement on an alternative, she was ready to call a general election. Government sources suggested she was first likely to make another attempt to force her deal through parliament in a third “meaningful vote”. This might happen in a “run-off” against any successful alternative from Monday’s indicative votes. The government has been discussing with the Speaker, John Bercow, whether there is a way to hold MV3 that would not fall foul of his insistence that the same proposition cannot be put before parliament again. A Downing Street spokesman highlighted the fact that May’s margin of defeat, 58, was smaller than the 149 majority she lost by earlier this month, and the crushing 230-strong defeat in the first meaningful vote in January. “We are at least going in the right direction,” the spokesman said. No 10 sources also pointed out that her deal had won more supporters than any of the eight options considered by MPs in Wednesday’s indicative votes, in which the most popular, a referendum, received the backing of 268 MPs. Backers of the various alternatives were discussing how to build a proposition that could command a majority on Monday. Cabinet ministers were instructed to abstain in last week’s process, which the government had initially tried to scupper by whipping MPs to vote against the business motion. May is likely to come under pressure to offer a free vote to cabinet supporters of a soft Brexit – the “Gaukward squad” – on Monday. Jeremy Corbyn responded to the prime minister’s latest defeat by calling on her to resign and trigger a general election.“If the prime minister can’t accept that, then she must go, not at an indeterminate date in the future, but now, so that we can decide the future of this country through a general election,” the Labour leader said. He had earlier urged his MPs to reject the deal, warning that it would lead to a “blindfold Brexit”. Just five Labour MPs voted for the withdrawal agreement. Before the vote, May had told MPs that the withdrawal agreement was the only way to guarantee Brexit and avoid a “cliff edge” in two weeks’ time. “When the division bell rings in a few moments, every one of us will have to look into our hearts to decide what is right for our country,” she said. Friday’s vote did not technically qualify as a third “meaningful vote”, because MPs were asked to consider only the withdrawal agreement, which includes the controversial Irish backstop and secures EU citizens’ rights and the post-Brexit transition period.
MPs vote by 321 to 278 to rule out no deal despite government whipping Tory MPs against motion, following 312-308 win for Spelman amendment    Folks, it’s time to wrap up the blog for the night.  I’ll be back in a few hours to launch a new Politics live blog, bringing you all of Thursday’s Brexit and other political news. A reminder of what’s on the agenda for Thursday: Parliament will vote on a motion that sets next Wednesday as the deadline for MPs to pass a Brexit deal. It says, if a deal is passed by then, the government will seek an extension of article 50 until 30 June. But if the deal is not passed by then, then the government will need a longer extension, requiring the UK to take part in European elections. Thanks so much for your company and your comments. See you soon.  There have been some remarkable turns of phrase from commentators and politicians in their attempts to capture just what exactly has gone on in British politics in the last few days. The most quotable quote from an MP on Brexit in a while (forever?) came from Conservative backbencher Steve Double who said in parliament on Tuesday: This is a turd of a deal, which has now been taken away and polished, and is now a polished turd. But it might be the best turd that we’ve got. This is also pretty good from Tom Peck at the Indy, who says: The House of Commons was a Benny Hill chase on acid, running through a Salvador Dali painting in a spaceship on its way to infinity. A vague, and vain attempt to make sense of the great mad nights in British political history.Sketch here.https://t.co/4zCw505yNv pic.twitter.com/ZENHV8wTnz It has got us wondering about the best Brexit analogies, or attempts to explain Brexit that have come out over the months/years. Any favourites? Let me know in the comments or on Twitter. This one springs to mind: Updated  The Times: Brexit meltdown #tomorrowspaperstoday pic.twitter.com/4YkRFLao1L i: Meltdown #tomorrowspaperstoday pic.twitter.com/RlrU4MqyjF Daily Mail: Chaos reigns #tomorrowspaperstoday pic.twitter.com/jwJ63dK0Lc The Daily Telegraph: Brexit delayed until further notice after gang of four rebels #tomorrowspaperstoday pic.twitter.com/r57T5xosb4 The Guardian: May’s final warning to Tory rebels: back me or lose Brexit #tomorrowspaperstoday pic.twitter.com/e1pQkfuxGt The Scotsman: MPs reject no-deal Brexit under any circumstances #tomorrowspaperstoday pic.twitter.com/NHNYD1kUCB Metro: It’s a total no-no #tomorrowspaperstoday pic.twitter.com/N3gYH2Y2m5 Financial Times: May issues ultimatum after MPs seize control with vote to ditch no-deal Brexit #tomorrowspaperstoday pic.twitter.com/dzHajhjgSX Daily Express: Don’t let EU bullies win the day #tomorrowspaperstoday pic.twitter.com/yfSEz7ouK3  And a little more from Varadkar’s speech, in which he says that Ireland needs its friends in the US “more so than ever”. While others may make a different decision, we see ourselves at the heart of the common European home which we help to build.  We want to maintain and enhance the transatlantic relationship and we are determined to protect the Good Friday Agreement and everything that flows from it.  So whatever happens in the coming months, we are sure about our place in the world, we know where we are going, and as a country we are confident about the future. Updated  Leo Varadkar, the Taoiseach of Ireland, has been in Washington DC, where he delivered a speech at a gala dinner. Gavan Reilly, the political correspondent for Virgin Media News in Ireland, was in attendance and says Varadkar received two spontaneous interruptions for applause as he says Ireland will remain a committed member of the EU and guarantor of the Good Friday Agreement. The theme of tonight’s dinner is honouring visionary women. Asks the Taoiseach: “How many men does it take to screw in a lightbulb? Not as many as it takes to smash a glass ceiling.” Says Ireland and USA have recently smashed stereotypes of what leaders are supposed to look like And *two* spontaneous interruptions for applause as he says Ireland will remain a committed member of the EU and guarantor of the Good Friday Agreement  UKIP in Northern Ireland has called Wednesday night “a defining evening” in which the “game-playing political class” brazenly defied the very people who elected them. I’m quite intrigued to know what they mean by the ominous use of an ellipsis at the end of the tweet. It’s quite a menacing bit of punctuation. A defining evening.Our game-playing political class have exposed themselves. By brazenly defying the very people who elected them, those in the Westminster bubble have made a mockery of British democracy. They think they know better.They needn’t celebrate just yet though...  And Sarah Wollaston has reiterated the calls from the Independent Group for a People’s Vote. A reminder that they are tabling an amendment calling for a “public vote in which the people of the United Kingdom may give their consent for either leaving the European Union on terms to be determined by Parliament or retaining the United Kingdom’s membership of the European Union”. Photographs of the proposed amendment are being widely shared by MPs on Twitter tonight. We are almost out of road, time to start pressing #PeoplesVote amendments at every opportunity & time for Labour front bench to finally get off the fence pic.twitter.com/c7AXmAnIei  Sarah Wollaston, MP for Totnes, formerly of the Conservative Party now of the Independent Group, has been watching Peston and is unimpressed by Angela Rayner’s performance. She says both major parties have failed to deliver, which is why we are seeing, what she describes as, “broken politics”. Seriously, @UKLabour is never going to genuinely support a #PeoplesVote just keep saying they are almost very nearly there .... & their Conference motion is absolutely clear https://t.co/7F6IEENVe8 Our #brokenpolitics summed up: A Govt that says NoDeal would be a disaster, then hours later whips its MPs to vote for it & an incompetent Opposition that says it backs a #PeoplesVote but won’t do anything to make it happen.  Labour MP for Walthamstow, Stella Creasy, has shared four videos explaining to her constituents what went down today. It’s an interesting summary of the day’s events, as well as giving a sense of how the day unfolded from the perspective of one of the players in the “complete parliamentary madness” of the day, as Creasy describes it. Creasy says she will be supporting amendments that give Britain a longer extension before it has to leave the EU, saying the country needs more time to “sort this out”. Creasy says she was unsurprised that as Theresa May left the House today it was to shouts of “resign”, saying that any other prime minister who had failed to carry parliament with her, and indeed her own party with her, would not still be in Downing Street, adding that she thinking “the country will suffer as a result” of May’s refusal to step down. If you’ve got seven minutes, the four videos are worth a watch. Walthamstow hopefully this part 1 of 4 of tonights update on what happened in parliament. Having total technology meltdown which is just further #brexithaos so please bear with me in trying to keep you updated! 1/4 pic.twitter.com/rRDG2DiEYV Walthamstow hopefully this part 2 of 4 of tonights update on what happened in parliament. Having total technology meltdown which is just further #brexithaos so please bear with me in trying to keep you updated! 2/4 pic.twitter.com/fQFBORNcrx Walthamstow hopefully this part 3 of 4 of tonights update on what happened in parliament. Having total technology meltdown which is just further #brexithaos so please bear with me in trying to keep you updated! 3/4 pic.twitter.com/VLOsmXogFm Walthamstow hopefully this part 4 of 4 of tonights update on what happened in parliament. Having total technology meltdown which is just further #brexithaos so please bear with me in trying to keep you updated! 4/4 pic.twitter.com/euzG9gBmRw  Also, thank you to starsmurf for this lovely comment, I can confirm that our moderators are indeed very long-suffering, as well as being brilliant, dedicated and all-round lovely people. They are also often unsung, so I’m taking this opportunity to share your praise of them above the line: Thank you mods and all those updating ATL. We really need to have a crowdfunder set up for the poor long-suffering mods plus Andrew Sparrow and the others who have kept this going pretty much 24 hours a day over these last few days. We can keep them in coffee for when they’re working and something stronger for when they’re off duty or when it all gets too much. Cakes and other sources of sustenance could be provided too. We all win because journalists with plenty of sugar and caffeine in their systems can cope with the political chaos while the mods can deal with the trolls and Putinbots. A well-fed mod is a happy mod. And while we don’t have a crowd-funding campaign for sugary and caffeinated goodness, the Guardian runs on a membership model. So if you love us, make sure you’ve joined up.
Of the eight options on which MPs voted, the closest result was for a customs union - but none of them won a majority Press Association  MPs will voted on eight alternative Brexit options after parliament seized control of the Commons agenda to force a series of indicative votes. The following options were selected for a vote by the Speaker, John Bercow, and all were rejected by a majority of MPs. Backed by the Conservative MPs John Baron, David Amess, Martin Vickers and Stephen Metcalfe, the motion proposes leaving the EU without a deal on 12 April. Tabled by the Conservative MPs Nick Boles, Robert Halfon and Andrew Percy and Labour’s Stephen Kinnock, Lucy Powell and Diana Johnson. The motion proposes UK membership of the European Free Trade Association (Efta) and European Economic Area (EEA). It allows continued participation in the single market and a “comprehensive customs arrangement” with the EU after Brexit, which would remain in place until the agreement of a wider trade deal that guarantees frictionless movement of goods and an open border on the island of Ireland. A motion tabled by the Conservative MP George Eustice – who quit as agriculture minister this month to fight for Brexit – proposes remaining within the EEA and rejoining Efta, but remaining outside a customs union with the EU. The motion was signed by other Conservative MPs including the former minister Nicky Morgan and the head of the Brexit Delivery Group, Simon Hart. This plan requires a commitment to negotiate a “permanent and comprehensive UK-wide customs union with the EU” in any Brexit deal. It is tabled by the veteran Conservative Europhile Ken Clarke, and backed by Labour’s Yvette Cooper, Helen Goodman and the chair of the Commons exiting the EU committee, Hilary Benn, and the former Tory ministers Sir Oliver Letwin and Sarah Newton. Labour has tabled a motion proposing its plan for a close economic relationship with the EU. The plan includes a comprehensive customs union with the UK having a say on future trade deals; close alignment with the single market; matching new EU rights and protections; participation in EU agencies and funding programmes; and agreement on future security arrangements, including access to the European arrest warrant. Under this plan, if the government failed to pass its withdrawal agreement it would have to stage a vote on a no-deal Brexit two sitting days before the scheduled date of departure. If MPs refused to support no deal, the prime minister would be required to halt Brexit by revoking article 50. The motion, tabled by the Scottish National party’s Joanna Cherry, has been signed by 33 MPs including the Conservative former attorney general Dominic Grieve, the Liberal Democrat leader, Sir Vince Cable, Labour’s Ben Bradshaw and all 11 members of the Independent Group. Drawn up by the Labour MPs Peter Kyle and Phil Wilson and tabled by the former foreign secretary Dame Margaret Beckett with the backing of scores of MPs across the house, this motion would require a public vote to confirm any Brexit deal passed by parliament before its ratification. A group of Conservative MPs, including Marcus Fysh, Steve Baker and Priti Patel, have signed a motion that calls for the government to seek to agree preferential trade arrangements with the EU, in case the UK is unable to implement a withdrawal agreement with the bloc. A cross-party proposal calls for Theresa May’s withdrawal agreement to be implemented with the controversial “backstop” for the Irish border replaced by alternative arrangements. Backed by Conservatives from both the leave and remain wings of the party, including Nicky Morgan, Jacob Rees-Mogg, Damian Green, Steve Baker and Sir Graham Brady, as well as the DUP’s Nigel Dodds and Labour Brexiter Kate Hoey. Under this plan, the government is called on to “urgently” bring forward any legislation needed to revoke article 50 “in the event that the house fails to approve any withdrawal agreement four days before the end of the article 50 period”. It has been signed by 28 MPs, including the SNP’s Angus Brendan MacNeil and the Tory MP Ken Clarke. Tabled by Labour’s MP for Stoke-on-Trent Central, Gareth Snell, this motion simply states that it should be the government’s objective to implement a trade agreement including a customs union with the EU. It mirrors an amendment to the trade bill secured by Labour peers in the House of Lords. Tory MPs including Baron and Amess, as well as Andrew Percy and Neil Parish, have also backed a motion to leave the EU on 22 May with Mrs May’s withdrawal agreement amended to allow the UK to unilaterally exit the Northern Ireland backstop. Backed by SNP MPs including Ian Blackford, Kirsty Blackman and Stephen Gethins, this motion requires an agreement that the UK will not leave without a deal, and that no action for leaving the EU will be taken without a consent motion passed in both the Scottish parliament and the Welsh assembly. A similar group of Tory MPs have backed a proposal calling for the government to “at least reciprocate the arrangements put in place by the EU and or its member states to manage the period following the UK’s departure from the EU”, in case the UK is unable to implement a withdrawal agreement. A cross-party proposal, signed by 94 MPs including the Conservatives’ Will Quince, Labour’s Frank Field and the DUP’s Nigel Dodds, urges the house to “reaffirm its commitment to honour the result of the referendum that the UK should leave the European Union”. • This article was amended on 28 March 2019 to update the tallies on votes H and J after the Speaker of the House corrected the counts that had been initially declared. 
Prime minister likely to have to request long article 50 extension after Bercow intervenes   Theresa May’s government has been plunged into constitutional chaos after the Speaker blocked the prime minister from asking MPs to vote on her Brexit deal for a third time unless it had fundamentally changed. With 11 days to go until Britain is due to leave the EU, May was forced to pull her plans for another meaningful vote because John Bercow said she could not ask  MPs to pass the same deal, after they rejected it twice by huge margins. EU officials, meanwhile, were considering offering her a new date for a delayed Brexit to resolve the crisis. Quoting from the guide to parliamentary procedure, Erskine May, Bercow said the question “may not be brought forward again during the same session” and that it was a “strong and longstanding convention” dating back to 1604. It must be “not different in terms of wording, but different in terms of substance”, he said, suggesting there must be a change in what the EU is offering. Bercow’s surprise intervention means May is likely to have to go to Thursday’s Brussels summit with a request for a long extension to article 50, which could mean the UK has to spend more than £100m on participating in European parliament elections.  During the delay, parliament would have to make a decision on how to break the deadlock, potentially with a second referendum, an election or a cross-party proposal for a softer Brexit. Alternatively, government sources suggested May could negotiate a lengthy extension with the EU, with a “get-out clause” enabling it to be cut short if her Brexit deal is passed by parliament before the European parliamentary elections. One option under consideration is some kind of “paving vote” to set aside the convention if a majority in the House of Commons agreed they wanted to look at the deal again. Speaker of the House of Commons John Bercow ruled on 18 March that he would not allow parliament another vote on the same Brexit deal. Prime minister Theresa May would have to make 'substantial' changes to her government's two previous attempted to pass the withdrawal agreement deal with the EU. Bercow said: "If the government wishes to bring forward a new proposition that is neither the same nor substantially the same as that disposed of by the House on March 12, this would be entirely in order. What the government cannot legitimately do is resubmit to the house the same proposition - or substantially the same proposition - as that of last week, which was rejected by 149 votes. This ruling should not be regarded as my last word on the subject. It is simply meant to indicate the test which the government must meet in order for me to rule that a third meaningful vote can legitimately be held in this parliamentary session." Sources in Brussels suggested the EU may offer May a helping hand by agreeing on a new delayed Brexit date at the summit, which could allow her to argue next week that the deal is sufficiently different to merit a third vote in parliament. Some hardline Conservative Brexit supporters were pleased that May’s efforts to pass her deal were being frustrated, hoping the EU would veto an extension and the UK would be forced to exit without a deal on 29 March. Government sources downplayed such a scenario, saying the EU was highly likely to grant an extension. A government source said: “It seems clear that the Speaker’s motive here is to rule out a meaningful vote this week, which also stands in the way of a securing a shorter extension. “It leads you to believe what he really wants is a longer extension, where parliament will take over the process and force a softer form of Brexit. But anyone who thinks that this makes no deal more likely is mistaken – the Speaker wouldn’t have done it if it did.”  No 10 and ministers were locked in debate on Monday night on how to get around the Speaker’s ruling in order to have another meaningful vote next week. The government was initially blindsided by Bercow’s pronouncement and unable to comment on what May would do next as it had not been “forewarned”. By Monday evening they would only say that the government “noted” the Speaker’s statement, adding: “This is something that requires proper consideration.” But supporters of May’s deal were openly furious, with Robert Buckland, who as solicitor general is one of May’s chief law officers, saying it amounted to a “constitutional crisis”. He suggested No 10 might have to consider the drastic step of ending the parliamentary session early and restarting a new session, although government sources suggested this would not be an easy option. “Frankly we could have done without this, but it’s something we’re going to have to negotiate with and deal with,” he told BBC News. Another minister, Rory Stewart, appeared to liken the Speaker to Humpty Dumpty saying his attitude was that a rule “means just what I choose it to mean”. Other senior government figures described Downing St as being in a state of shock. “It’s miserable,” one said. “I think the first thing is the government having to come to terms with it.” A number of Conservative MPs said they suspected Bercow’s underlying reason for refusing another vote this week was an attempt to bounce the government into seeking a longer extension to article 50 from the EU, allowing parliament to seize control of the Brexit process. However, others suggested the Speaker’s ruling could be helpful to May because there was little chance her deal would have passed this week anyway. Downing Street had made it clear the prime minister would only have put the deal to another vote with the backing of the Democratic Unionist party and more Conservatives, but sources close to the talks told the Guardian a breakthrough was unlikely before the end of this week. “It is looking extremely unlikely that there is a clear path through to a deal this week. The reality is that practically to get it signed off by all parties, we would have had to have a deal concluded by today to get it through before Thursday’s EU council,” said one DUP source. The angriest reaction to Bercow’s announcement came from Conservative Brexiters who had switched to vote for May’s deal and were among those coaxing colleagues to come over the line with them at the next opportunity. Sir Graham Brady, the chair of the 1922 Committee of backbenchers, said the deal was “clearly gathering support” and it was essential that parliament was given another opportunity to vote. The former children’s minister Tim Loughton said it was the “most serious constitutional crisis I have seen in my 22 years in this house”. “Just when it looked like order was about to finally emerge from the chaos, and there was real momentum building to get sufficient support to back the deal, now Bercow has fashioned a way to reassert the chaos,” he said.
MPs vote overwhelmingly to request extension to article 50 – but eight ministers vote against motion   Brexit is set to be delayed by at least three months, after parliament opted overwhelmingly to request an extension to article 50 on another day of divisive votes that exposed the split in Theresa May’s cabinet. The prime minister is now expected to bring her twice-defeated Brexit deal back to parliament on Tuesday, after she narrowly retained control of the next steps of the process. The votes, the last in a series of vital parliamentary decisions on Brexit over several days, mean that Britain’s departure from the EU should not now take place before 30 June and gave the prime minister a window to resuscitate her plan. But May’s cabinet splintered yet again and eight cabinet ministers, including the Brexit secretary, Steve Barclay, and leader of the house, Andrea Leadsom, voted against the government’s motion extending article 50, preferring to keep the threat of no deal in place. In total, more than half of Tory MPs voted against the motion. Barclay wound up the debate for the government, saying: “It is time for this house to act in the national interest, it’s time to put forward an extension that is realistic” – before trooping through the no lobby to reject that argument. Government sources insisted he was not intending to resign, despite his unprecedented action. The shadow Brexit secretary, Keir Starmer, said: “This evening the Brexit secretary voted against his government’s own motion on Brexit, which earlier in the day he had defended in the House of Commons. That’s the equivalent of the chancellor voting against his own budget. This is a government that has completely lost control.” Labour’s divisions over Brexit were also clearly on display, however. The party whipped its MPs to abstain on an amendment calling for a second referendum, but 24 Labour MPs defied the whips to vote for it and 17 rebelled to vote against, including several frontbenchers. The Stoke-on-Trent North MP, Ruth Smeeth, resigned as the parliamentary private secretary to Labour’s deputy leader, Tom Watson, after voting against a referendum. “This was a really difficult decision to make, but I made a promise to my constituents that I would not consider a people’s vote, and I can’t just pretend this vote is not happening. I need to consider the views of my constituents and vote against the people’s vote,” she told her local paper, the Stoke Sentinel. The junior shadow ministers Yvonne Fovargue, Emma Lewell-Buck, Justin Madders, and Stephanie Peacock also voted against the second referendum amendment. All were reportedly asked to resign by Jeremy Corbyn’s office following the vote and it was announced that they had stepped down on Thursday night. The amendment, tabled by the former Tory Sarah Wollaston, now of the Independent Group (TIG), and signed by around 30 MPs, was voted down by 85 votes to 334. The official People’s Vote campaign had urged MPs not to support the amendment, arguing it was not yet the time to press the case. But TIG’s Anna Soubry criticised Labour for declining to support the amendment, saying: “This is a betrayal of Labour party members and voters, Labour MPs, Labour’s conference policy and, most importantly, the British public. The Labour party leadership are determined to deliver Brexit, which would harm our country.” Asked whether Conservative MPs who voted against the government’s motion would be disciplined, May’s spokesman said it was clear it was a free vote on Thursday night but that cabinet ministers who voted against the government motion would now be expected to follow government policy. “The government’s motion won with a substantial majority, one in the name of the prime minister,” the spokesman said. “It was a free vote and people were free to exercise their votes as they so choose. But the cabinet is united around allowing the UK to leave the EU with a deal and we need to get on and deliver that,” he said. Asked whether cabinet ministers were now bound by the government’s position to extend article 50, which was passed overwhelmingly by 413 votes to 202, a No 10 spokesman said: “Yes, that is how collective responsibility works.” The past few days have seen an extraordinary collapse in Tory discipline, with four ex-remainer cabinet ministers abstaining on a whipped vote on Wednesday night, and May forced to offer a free vote on Thursday’s motion to delay Brexit. The prime minister has consistently emphasised the importance of keeping the threat of a no-deal Brexit on the table, to avoid weakening Britain’s negotiating hand. But a group of her own ministers threatened to resign en masse if she refused to offer them a vote on requesting to extend article 50. The government’s motion said that if May’s plan is approved by next Wednesday, the government will request a brief extension until 30 June, to give parliament time to pass the legislation needed to leave the EU. Government sources indicated another meaningful vote is likely to be held on Tuesday 19 March, with Downing Street working intensively to win over the Democratic Unionist party and the Brexit-backing European Research Group. If the deal does not pass on Tuesday, May would be likely to set out her request for a longer extension before the European council summit on Thursday. Downing Street said the blame for delay lay with parliament and was against the prime minister’s will. “The prime minister absolutely wanted and strived for the UK to be leaving the EU on 29 March. Everything she has done since entered office was intended to deliver that,” the spokesman said. “Now we have to confront the difficult decision that decisions taken by parliament have left us in.” Earlier, MPs narrowly passed up a chance to seize control of the Brexit process through a series of indicative votes in the Commons, defeating by 312 votes to 314 an amendment tabled by the Labour MPs Hilary Benn and Yvette Cooper, and former Conservative minister Oliver Letwin. The amendment called for steps to “enable the House of Commons to find a way forward that can command majority support” after Theresa May’s Brexit plan was rejected for a second time on Tuesday. The Labour leader, Jeremy Corbyn, said: “After the last few days of government chaos and some defeats, all of us now have the opportunity and the responsibility to work together to find a solution to the crisis facing this country, where the government has so dramatically failed to do so. “We have begun to hold meetings with members across the house to find a consensus and a compromise that meets the needs of our country.” There is no EU consensus over how to handle a request for an extension. Before the Commons latest votes, the European council president, Donald Tusk, expressed his backing for an extension beyond the three months that May is initially seeking. “During my consultations ahead of [the leaders’ summit next week], I will appeal to the EU27 to be open to a long extension if the UK finds it necessary to rethink its Brexit strategy and build consensus around it,” Tusk tweeted.
None of eight indicative votes gains majority, with customs union option coming closest   A first attempt by MPs to find a consensus route forward for Brexit has ended in deadlock and confusion after the Commons rejected every option put forward, albeit with a near-even split on the idea of joining a customs union. Oliver Letwin, the veteran Conservative MP who led the process which allowed backbenchers to seize control of the order paper to hold a series of indicative votes, said the results were “disappointing” but he hoped a new round of votes would be held on Monday. The Speaker, John Bercow, said he would allow this to take place, prompting shouts of protests from many MPs. The Brexit secretary, Stephen Barclay, said the results strengthened the government’s view that Theresa May’s Brexit deal was the best and only way forward. On the lack of a majority for any of the eight alternatives put to the vote on Wednesday, he said: “It demonstrates that there is not easy option here, that there is no easy way forward.” Groups of MPs had suggested 15 ideas, of which eight were selected by Bercow for votes. The closest result was a commitment for the government to negotiate a “permanent and comprehensive UK-wide customs union with the EU” in any Brexit deal. Put forward by the pro-EU Tory veteran Ken Clarke and others, it was voted down by 271 votes to 265. The only other relatively close vote was on a plan drawn up by the Labour MPs Peter Kyle and Phil Wilson, and tabled by the former foreign secretary Margaret Beckett, to require a referendum to confirm any Brexit deal. This was lost by 268 votes to 295. Other softer Brexit options sustained heavier defeats. A plan for “common market 2.0”, involving UK membership of the European Free Trade Association (Efta) and European Economic Area (EEA), had 188 votes in support and 283 against. The Labour frontbench plan for a softer Brexit was defeated by 237 to 307, while a motion tabled by the Conservative MP George Eustice, which proposed staying in Efta and the EEA without a customs union, only gained 64 votes, with 377 against. The final three votes were also decisive, and concerned other areas of Brexit. A Conservative Brexiter plan to propose leaving the EU without a deal on 12 April lost by 160 votes to 400; a Scottish National party plan to revoke article 50 lost by 184 to 293; and another Brexiter plan seeking preferential trade arrangements with the EU if there is no withdrawal agreement lost by 139 to 422. The complex set of votes took place after an amendment to the government’s Brexit motion on Monday was passed by the Commons by 329 votes to 302. Tabled by many dozens of MPs and led by Letwin, it set aside Wednesday for the Commons to hold non-binding votes on as many options as MPs wanted to put down. The government has criticised the way the MPs seized control of parliamentary business, saying it was a dangerous constitutional precedent. To this end, it whipped against the vote on Monday, prompting three junior ministers to resign so they could back the plan. Conservative MPs were also ordered to vote against the business motion on Wednesday, which was needed for the debate to happen at all. It passed nonetheless, by 331 votes to 287, with 33 Tories rebelling. Labour also whipped for its MPs to support some plans, including the holding of a confirmatory referendum. This prompted the shadow housing minister, Melanie Onn, to resign from the frontbench, saying she could not support any such vote. • This article was amended on 29 March 2019. After publication, the Speaker of the House corrected the counts that had been initially declared for two votes: H, EEA/Efta without customs union, was defeated 64 to 377, not 65 to 377 as originally declared; and J, Customs union, was defeated 265 to 271, not 264 to 271 as originally declared. These figures have been updated.
If May’s deal is not passed by Commons then Brexit will be delayed only until 12 April   The EU has handed Theresa May two weeks’ grace to devise an alternative Brexit plan if her deal falls next week after the prime minister failed to convince the bloc that she was capable of avoiding a no-deal Brexit. After a marathon late-night session of talks, the EU’s leaders ripped up May’s proposals and a new Brexit timeline was pushed on the prime minister to avoid the cliff-edge deadline of 29 March – next Friday. Under the deal agreed by May, Britain will now stay a member state until 12 April if the withdrawal agreement is rejected by MPs at the third time of asking. The government will be able to seek a longer extension during that period if it can both “indicate a way forward” and agree to hold European elections. In the unlikely event that May does win the support of the Commons when the Brexit deal goes to MPs again on Tuesday, the UK will stay a member state until 22 May to allow necessary withdrawal legislation to be passed. “The 12 April is the new 29 March,” an EU official said. Donald Tusk, the European council president, told reporters in a late-night press conference that he had several meetings through the evening to secure May’s agreement. He said: “What this means in practice is that, until that date, all options will remain open, and the cliff-edge date will be delayed. The UK government will still have a choice of a deal, no-deal, a long extension or revoking article 50.” Asked how long an extension could be on offer, the European commission president, Jean-Claude Juncker, said: “Until the very end.” The French president, Emmanuel Macron, told reporters as he left the summit that the EU had acted to protect its interests in response to a “vacuum” in Westminster. “The EU in a very clear manner has today responded to a British political crisis,” he said. “The British politicians are incapable to put in place what their people have demanded. Their people voted for Brexit.” Spain’s prime minister, Pedro Sánchez, described the last-minute deal as “satisfactory for both sides” and one that would safeguard the EU’s institutions in the run-up to European elections. “As far as Spain’s concerned, it’s a good deal,” he said. “We’re at a critical moment in the construction of Europe,” he said. “History will judge what happens over the coming weeks. Spanish citizens in the UK and Britons in Spain need to know that the government is prepared for a disorderly exit. The EU and the Spanish government have attached amendments to the agreement. But it doesn’t depend on us any more – it depends on the British government.” Earlier on Thursday, May had made an address to leaders described as “90 minutes of nothing”, by sources, during which she failed to persuade the bloc that she had a plan to avoid a no-deal Brexit. May had been asking for an extension to article 50 until 30 June to make time for vital legislation to pass should she manage to get her deal through the Commons next week. But her appeal “dismally” failed to offer any answers as to what she would do if the deal was blocked by MPs again, sources said, provoking EU leaders into taking matters into their own hands and in effect taking control of her future. “She didn’t even give clarity if she is organising a vote,” said one aide to a leader. “Asked three times what she would do if she lost the vote, she couldn’t say. It was awful. Dreadful. Evasive even by her standards.” When leaders asked May what she was going to do if her deal was voted down, an official added that the prime minister replied that she was following her plan A of getting it through. It was then that the EU decided that “she didn’t have a plan so they needed to come up with one for her”, the source added. Special meeting of the European Council (Art. 50) (21 March 2019) – Conclusions 1. The European Council takes note of the letter of Prime Minister Theresa May of 20 March 2019.  2. In response, the European Council approves the Instrument relating to the Withdrawal Agreement and the Joint Statement supplementing the Political Declaration agreed between the European Commission and the government of the United Kingdom in Strasbourg on 11 March 2019.  3. The European Council agrees to an extension until 22 May 2019, provided the Withdrawal Agreement is approved by the House of Commons next week. If the Withdrawal Agreement is not approved by the House of Commons next week, the European Council agrees to an extension until 12 April 2019 and expects the United Kingdom to indicate a way forward before this date for consideration by the European Council.  4. The European Council reiterates that there can be no opening of the Withdrawal Agreement that was agreed between the Union and the United Kingdom in November 2018. Any unilateral commitment, statement or other act should be compatible with the letter and the spirit of the Withdrawal Agreement.  5. The European Council calls for work to be continued on preparedness and contingency at all levels for the consequences of the United Kingdom’s withdrawal, taking into account all possible outcomes.  6. The European Council will remain seized of the matter. With May out of the room, EU leaders delayed their plans to discuss relations with China and launched into a marathon late-night session in Brussels. As their talks wound on, the EU moved towards the “flextension” delay. It was then put to May by Tusk shortly after 11pm Brussels time after eight hours of talks, with and without the prime minister. “What this model is designed for is to make it clear that no deal is not the EU’s choice, it is the UK’s choice,” a diplomatic source said. “The prime minister is braced for a long extension, but doesn’t want to take responsibility for it,” the source said. The EU had initially looked at solely offering an extension up until 22 May, the day before European elections would be held, on the condition May’s deal passed next week. But it was a lack of confidence in the prime minister following her latest performance in front of the leaders that forced the EU’s member states to act to shore up against a no-deal Brexit and allow the British parliament time to take control. France and Belgium had initially pushed for an unconditional extension up to the 7 May, on the eve of the French Fête de la Victoire bank holiday, to provide a buffer to the economic shock of a no-deal Brexit. The EU is also staging a summit in the Romanian city of Sibiu on 9 May to debate the post-Brexit future of the bloc. Macron told the room that he did not want the chaos of a no-deal Brexit to erupt before the French went to the polls for their European elections on 26 May. EU sources said Macron’s “trump card” had triggered the leaders to work round the problem in a new way. “The European council worked well – and it is an elegant solution,” a source said. The prime minister said the EU’s decision left MPs with a clear choice: either they back her deal next week and leave smoothly on 22 May; or the government will have to return to Brussels with an alternative plan – either no deal or some unspecified alternative – in a fortnight’s time. May did not repeat the promise she made in the House of Commons on Wednesday that “as prime minister”, she would not countenance a longer extension, requiring the UK to participate in European elections. Many MPs interpreted that statement as a hint that she would step down rather than allow a longer delay. But on Thursday night she simply stressed: “I believe strongly that it would be wrong to ask people in the UK to participate in these elections three years after voting to leave the EU.” May also appeared to express a degree of contrition about the strident tone of her statement on Wednesday night, which caused a backlash among MPs and led to calls for her resignation. “Last night I expressed my frustration. I know that MPs are frustrated too. They have difficult jobs to do,” she said. MPs, including many of those whom the Tory whips were hoping to win over, had reacted angrily on Thursday to May’s claims that they were blocking the people’s will. A cross-party group of MPs is now considering how best to allow parliament to force May towards a softer Brexit or no Brexit at all. A new amendment has been laid for debate on Monday by Tory MP Sir Oliver Letwin and Labour MP Hilary Benn that would give parliament the chance to vote on ways forward. In Westminster, several MPs challenged the leader of the house, Andrea Leadsom, about the prime minister’s tone. On Thursday night, businesses and trades unions joined together to urge her to change course. In a rare joint letter, the TUC’s general secretary, Frances O’Grady, and the CBI’s Carolyn Fairbairn described the situation as a “national emergency” and called on the prime minister to seek a plan B.
Organisers hail UK’s ‘biggest-ever demo’, while Tom Watson leads calls for fresh referendum   In one of the biggest demonstrations in British history, a crowd estimated at over one million people yesterday marched peacefully through central London to demand that MPs grant them a fresh referendum on Brexit. The Put it to the People march, which included protesters from all corners of the United Kingdom and many EU nationals living here, took place amid extraordinary political turmoil and growing calls on prime minister Theresa May to resign. Some cabinet ministers are considering her de facto deputy David Lidington as an interim replacement for her, although as pro-Remain he would be strongly opposed by Brexiters. Organisers of the march said precise numbers had been difficult to gauge, but they believed the protest could have been even bigger than that against the Iraq war in February 2003. The decision by so many to take part, waving EU flags and banners and carrying effigies of Theresa May, came just three days after the prime minister said in a televised statement to the nation that she believed the British people did not support another referendum, and blamed MPs for trying to block their will. Senior politicians from all the main parties joined the march, including Labour’s deputy leader, Tom Watson, former Tory deputy prime minister Lord Heseltine, the mayor of London, Sadiq Khan, and the SNP leader and first minister of Scotland, Nicola Sturgeon. Addressing the crowd in Parliament Square – as chants of “Where’s Jeremy Corbyn?” rang out – Watson said May could not ignore the march and had to give the people a second vote. “The prime minister claims she speaks for Britain. Well, have a look out of the window, prime minister,” he said. “Open your curtains. Switch on your TV. Look at this great crowd today. Here are the people. Theresa May: you don’t speak for us.” Labour’s attempts to find common ground on Brexit had been rebuffed, he said. “At every turn, we have been ignored. At every stage, Theresa May has doubled down rather than reaching out. The way to break the stalemate is for parliament and the people to come together. The way to reunite our country is to decide on our future together. It’s time to say with one voice: put it to the people. Prime minister, you have lost control. Let the people take back control.” As Conservative MPs and ministers from both sides of the Brexit argument said May could not last in office for many more days – and Downing Street appeared to threaten them with a general election if her deal does not pass this week – Heseltine laid blame for the current crisis at her door. “Generals who lose wars blame the troops. Managers who break their companies blame the workers. Now we can add prime ministers who lose elections blame their MPs,” he said. Heseltine closed the rally with an appeal to young people to defend democracy and Britain’s place in the world. “Walk tall. Keep the faith. Go back to your villages, your towns and your cities,” he said. “Tell them you were here. Outside the buildings that inspire democracy. Fighting for our tomorrow.” Sturgeon said the EU’s decision last Thursday to delay Brexit day from 29 March until 12 April at the earliest had created more time to prevent disaster. “This is now the moment of maximum opportunity – we need to avoid the catastrophe of no-deal and the damage which would be caused by the prime minister’s bad deal.” Organisers said that mobile phone networks jammed and many people barely moved all afternoon as the crowd exceeded expectations. On Saturday a petition calling for article 50 to be revoked passed 4.5 million signatories, making it the most popular the government petitions website has ever hosted. Once any petition of this sort passes 100,000, parliament has to consider debating it. The march happened ahead of another critical week for Brexit and the prime minister. On Saturday night, as a growing number of Tory MPs said they would back a no-deal Brexit rather than May’s deal or some other arrangement – and many predicted the prime minister could be gone by the end of the week – Downing Street hit back, saying that if they pushed for a no-deal departure, the result could be a general election. “No-deal is not going to happen. Parliament will not allow it,” said a senior No 10 source. “There are so many people opposed to this in parliament that there would be a confidence motion in the government before no-deal. That could mean a general election.” On Monday a powerful group of backbench MPs will attempt to hand control of the Brexit process to parliament by securing indicative votes on alternative options for Brexit, including a soft, Norway-style option. Downing Street had been expected to try for a third time to force May’s deal through parliament on Tuesday. However, with Tory support for her disappearing, her team will delay the vote if they conclude that she will be defeated again – an outcome that could see her forced to quit. Whips have warned her that defeat is all but certain.
PM promises MPs free vote on no-deal Brexit on Wednesday after second drubbing   Theresa May has suffered a second humiliating defeat on her Brexit deal, as MPs voted it down by a crushing majority of 149, dealing a fresh blow to her shattered authority. With just 17 days to go until the UK is due to leave the EU, backbenchers from both sides of the Brexit divide immediately began manoeuvring to take control of the next steps of the process, in a series of key votes in the coming days. MPs ignored the prime minister’s pleas to “get the deal done” and voted the deal down for a second time, after the Democratic Unionist party (DUP) said it was not convinced by last-minute assurances won from Brussels on Monday. Of the Conservatives who rejected the deal in January, when May lost by a record majority of 230, 39 switched sides, including the former Brexit secretary David Davis – with many fearing Brexit would be delayed or reversed if they did not support the agreement. All but three Labour MPs trooped through the packed voting lobbies with the DUP, the pro-Brexit European Research Group (ERG), and some remain-supporting Tories, to sink May’s plan. In total, 75 Conservatives rebelled, and the deal was rejected by 391 votes to 242. With her voice cracked and fading, the prime minister had earlier pleaded with the House of Commons: “This is the moment and this is the time – time for us to come together, back this motion and get the deal done. Because only then can we can get on with what we need to do, what we were sent here to do.” After the catastrophic defeat, May immediately rose to her feet to say she “profoundly regretted” that her deal had been rejected for a second time. She said MPs would be given the opportunity to debate on Wednesday whether the UK should leave the EU without a deal on 29 March – and that she would offer MPs a free vote on that decision. They will then be given the opportunity to delay Brexit, by requesting an extension to article 50, on Thursday. The prime minister said she had “personally struggled” with the question of no deal, but said: “I am conscious also of my duties as prime minister of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and of the potential damage to the union that leaving without a deal could do.” The Labour leader, Jeremy Corbyn, said: “The government has been defeated again by an enormous majority and it must accept its deal is clearly dead and does not have the support of this house.” Moments after the crushing defeat, Donald Tusk, president of the European council, warned that he expected a “credible” reason for any delay to Brexit. “Should there be a UK reasoned request for an extension, the EU27 will consider it and decide by unanimity,” a spokesman for Tusk said. “The EU27 will expect a credible justification for a possible extension and its duration.” The ERG’s Steve Baker, together with the former education secretary Nicky Morgan and other senior Conservatives, quickly tabled an amendment to the government’s motion for Wednesday that would force May to pursue the so-called Malthouse compromise. The government will publish fresh details of its no-deal policies, including tariffs on food imports and how it will handle checks at the Northern Ireland border, on Wednesday morning. Philip Hammond, the chancellor, is also likely to underline the risks of no deal when he delivers his spring statement on Wednesday, before the debate. Some members of the ERG – including the former foreign secretary Boris Johnson – claim a no-deal Brexit would be preferable to May’s deal, and hope it could still happen. He said the prime minister’s deal had “reached the end of the road”. May insisted: “Voting against leaving without a deal, and for an extension, does not solve the problems we face. The EU will want to know what use we want to make of that extension. The house will have to answer that question.” She declined to set out how she would allow parliament to make that decision. But the motions on Wednesday and Thursday will be amendable, potentially allowing MPs to put forward their own alternatives. MPs pressing for a softer Brexit have signalled that they are ready to push the government to allow a series of votes to identify where a cross-party majority could be found – and believe they have supporters inside government. The former Tory minister Nick Boles warned his Brexiter colleagues even before Tuesday’s vote that he and his allies would “do whatever it takes to frustrate you”, and “work with opposition parties to build a majority for a softer Brexit deal”. We will then do whatever it takes to frustrate you. We will vote to stop no-deal Brexit on 29th March. We will vote to extend Article 50 for a few months. And we will then work with opposition parties to build a majority for a softer Brexit deal. But senior Tory insiders suggested May could instead attempt to bring her deal back a third time, in what is already being dubbed “meaningful vote 3”. Late on Tuesday night, May’s spokesman declined to rule out the idea of the PM putting her vote to parliament yet again, despite having already suffered two of the four biggest ever parliamentary defeats in the past 100 years. “She said at the beginning that she believes very strongly that the House of Commons wants to leave with a deal, and she very strongly believes that the deal she has negotiated is the best deal which is on offer,” he said. “But parliament over the next two days now potentially has two very significant decisions to make.” He also denied swirling rumours at Westminster that May could ultimately be forced to call a general election to overcome the stalemate in parliament. “We are not preparing for, we do not want a general election: our position is unchanged,” he said. May’s defeat came despite her late-night dash to Strasbourg on Monday, during which Jean-Claude Juncker signed off on three additions to the agreement struck in November. These included a joint interpretative instrument fleshing out both sides’ obligations to negotiate in good faith, a joint statement that they would work on alternative arrangements, and a unilateral statement by the UK that there would be nothing to stop Britain seeking to “disapply” the backstop if negotiations broke down. Earlier, the attorney general, Geoffrey Cox, had called on his colleagues to treat the vote as a “political judgment”, after his legal advice offered little comfort to those concerned about the backstop. In his statement, he suggested the changes reduced the risk of the UK being trapped indefinitely in the Northern Ireland backstop – but did not eliminate it.
Britain’s membership could be extended to March 2020 after PM fails to sell her plan in dash to Paris and Berlin    Theresa May’s request for a short Brexit delay has been torn up, putting the EU on track to instead extend Britain’s membership until 2020. Despite the prime minister’s desperate dash to Paris and Berlin to convince leaders of her plan to break the Brexit impasse, the European council president, Donald Tusk, signalled EU politicians’ lack of faith in her cross-party talks. Against a backdrop of growing support among the EU27 for a lengthy Brexit delay, Tusk picked apart May’s appeal for a shorter delay to 30 June in a letter to the leaders inviting them to Wednesday’s summit, where they will agree the new end date. An EU diplomat said on Tuesday, following a late-night meeting of ambassadors, that the two end dates crystallising in EU capitals were the end of December or the end of March 2020. A cabinet source voiced doubts over whether May could survive after presiding over such a long delay to Brexit, after previously having said she could not “as prime minister” accept a longer delay than 30 June. The source said some in No 10 now accept it is nearly game over and described all options as very difficult for the prime minister, raising questions about whether she can keep her warring party together much longer. May is facing a bitter backlash within her party over the likelihood of a long delay to Brexit and participation in EU elections, especially if that leads to any sort of deal with Labour involving a customs union. Four cabinet ministers – Andrea Leadsom, Chris Grayling, Liam Fox and Geoffrey Cox – were among more than half of Conservative MPs who refused to back a June extension to article 50 in a vote on Tuesday, underlining the plummeting support for May within her own party. In a damning indictment of Downing Street’s strategy, Tusk claimed the EU’s “experience so far, as well as the deep divisions within the House of Commons, give us little reason to believe that the ratification process can be completed by the end of June”. Twenty-four hours before May was due in Brussels to address leaders, he warned that “granting such an extension would increase the risk of a rolling series of short extensions and emergency summits, creating new cliff-edge dates”. “This, in turn, would almost certainly overshadow the business of the EU27 in the months ahead,” Tusk wrote. “The continued uncertainty would also be bad for our businesses and citizens. Finally, if we failed to agree on any next extension, there would be a risk of an accidental no-deal Brexit.” Cabinet sources said pro-Brexit ministers are being severely tested by the turn of events but would probably not walk out yet if a longer extension involved the option of it being cut short, as is expected. One source said there was a reluctance among the Brexiters to be replaced with more remainer MPs, but their patience could run out if May does agree to a deal with Labour involving a customs union. Fox, the international trade secretary, hinted he could not put up with that outcome in a letter to the 1922 committee describing a customs union as “the worst of all worlds”. The scale of anger among Conservative MPs about May’s talks with Jeremy Corbyn is such that ministers are now speculating about whether she would even command the support of enough her own MPs to have a chance of getting any soft Brexit deal through parliament. The prime minister’s request for a shorter extension had garnered some support among member states. The EU’s chief negotiator, Michel Barnier, advised ministers at a meeting in Luxembourg that a longer delay would lift the pressure on MPs to vote for the Brexit deal. But, according to a diplomatic note of the meeting seen by the Guardian, there is now growing support for the idea of a lengthy extension, sources said. France believes a full year extension, with the option to leave sooner, as proposed by Tusk earlier this month, would be “too long”, but it has been softening its position. Slovenia, Austria and Spain had all voiced concerns about a lengthy extension during the meeting on Tuesday, citing the risks to the EU of Britain behaving badly during the extra period of membership. But even those capitals most wary of prolonged delay are now merely insisting on a “mechanism” to keep a check on the British government’s behaviour. A draft summit communique, obtained by the Guardian, and to be agreed by the EU27’s leaders on Wednesday, assumes in return for an extension a “commitment by the United Kingdom to act in a constructive and responsible manner throughout this unique period in accordance with the duty of sincere cooperation”. It goes on to say the EU “expects the United Kingdom to fulfil this treaty obligation in a manner that reflects its situation as a withdrawing member state”, while the length of the extension is left blank. “To this effect, the United Kingdom shall facilitate the achievement of the union’s tasks and refrain from any measure which could jeopardise the attainment of the union’s objectives,” it adds in reference to the EU’s long-term plans, senior appointments and budget decisions. It adds that the UK will leave on 1 June unless it has held European elections between 23-26 May. The threat made by the Conservative MP Jacob Rees-Mogg to disrupt the union from inside in the event of a long extension to Britain’s membership was raised in the meeting of ministers, according to a leaked cable. Barnier told the group: “We will not tolerate this”. France’s Europe minister, Amélie de Montchalin, told her colleagues during the meeting: “[The UK] mustn’t stand in the way of any decisions that the EU would have taken without them”. An option, not included in the draft communique, that has been discussed in recent days is a requirement on the prime minister to set out in writing her intention for the UK to act in “sincere cooperation” with the bloc, and for a “weighing point” to be set up in October when Brussels would judge whether the UK was living up to its commitments. According to the leaked note, a number of member states told Barnier that they did not believe Labour and the Conservatives were genuinely seeking a compromise position. Luxembourg questioned why Labour had voted down the withdrawal agreement to which it is not opposed and concluded that its main focus was forcing an election. Speaking to reporters, Barnier had hinted at the points he had made to the EU’s ministers during a 50-minute address on Tuesday morning, by noting that a key factor in the bloc’s thinking would be the “pressure you might want to assert” on MPs. But even France showed signs of accepting the need for a longer extension, as May met Macron in Paris following her earlier meeting with the German chancellor, Angela Merkel, in Berlin. “We cannot keep holding repeat Brexit summits,” an Élysée source conceded. “The EU has other things to do. Only a few weeks before the European elections, the EU must show that it knows how to do other things than holding summits about Brexit.”
Exclusive: ‘grassroots’ groups that spent up to £1m on targeted Facebook ads share administrator who works for lobbying firm  A series of hugely influential Facebook advertising campaigns that appear to be separate grassroots movements for a no-deal Brexit are secretly overseen by employees of Sir Lynton Crosby’s lobbying company and a former adviser to Boris Johnson, documents seen by the Guardian reveal. The mysterious groups, which have names such as Mainstream Network and Britain’s Future, appear to be run independently by members of the public and give no hint that they are connected. But in reality they share an administrator who works for Crosby’s CTF Partners and have spent as much as £1m promoting sophisticated targeted adverts aimed at heaping pressure on individual MPs to vote for a hard Brexit. Repeated questions have been raised about who is backing at least a dozen high-spending groups that have flooded MPs’ inboxes with calls to reject Theresa May’s deal. Until now they were thought to be independent entities. But according to the documents, almost all the major pro-Brexit Facebook “grassroots” advertising campaigns in the UK share the same page admins or advertisers. These individuals include employees of CTF Partners and the political director of Boris Johnson’s campaigns to be mayor of London, who has worked closely with Crosby in the past. Their collective Facebook expenditure swamps the amount spent in the last six months by all the UK’s major political parties and the UK government combined. They have paid for thousands of different targeted Facebook ads encouraging members of the public to write to their local MPs and call for the toughest possible exit from the EU, creating the impression of organic public opposition to Theresa May’s deal. Crosby’s secretive lobbying company, CTF Partners, has come under increasing scrutiny in recent months. Leaked documents have revealed how it boasts of its ability to run fake online grassroots campaigns that encourage users to join an online community and then be “mobilised to communicate directly with key decision-makers”, whether to delegitimise the Qatari government or convince people that burning coal is good. The Australian political strategist helped run the last four Conservative general election campaigns, helping to secure an unexpected majority government for the party in 2015. He has recently been repeatedly linked to a potential Conservative leadership campaign by Johnson, having been lined up to run the former foreign secretary’s abortive 2016 bid for the same position. CTF Partners gave Johnson an interest-free loan of £23,000 – subsequently repaid – in January, while the company already employs arch-Brexiter former Tory MP Stewart Jackson in an advisory role and paid for the former Brexit secretary David Davis to go on trips. Mainstream Network attracted attention last year when it was exposed for spending at least £250,000 to reach more than 10 million voters with adverts urging voters to email their local MP and urging them to “chuck Chequers”, alongside articles criticising George Soros’s involvement in the remain campaign. After it attracted attention it was abruptly shut down. Although Facebook has substantially increased the level of transparency around political advertising in recent months, all that is required to run such a campaign is a publicly named individual who is registered to a UK postal address or contact details for a public organisation. There is no true disclosure around a campaign’s financial backers and no UK law requiring financial transparency outside an election period. After the closure of the Mainstream Network site, similar adverts began appearing on a Facebook page named Britain’s Future, whose public frontman is a former Two Pints Of Lager and a Packet of Crisps scriptwriter named Tim Dawson who later became a Conservative council candidate. The group hit the headlines last month when it was revealed it was the biggest single UK political advertiser on Facebook, spending £422,000 on adverts campaigning for a hard Brexit despite never declaring its financial backers. According to documents seen by the Guardian, individuals with the ability to place adverts on both the Mainstream Network and Britain’s Future page include Reuben Solomon, whom multiple sources identified as an employee of Crosby’s CTF Partners. He did not respond to a request for comment but a relative, who previously lived with him at an address in north London, confirmed to the Guardian that Solomon worked for Crosby. According to the documents, other individuals with oversight of the Mainstream Network Facebook page include Charles Carroll and Alex Crowley. Carroll, who deleted his LinkedIn profile after the Guardian began to seek comment for this article, also works for Crosby’s CTF Partners, according to a cached version of the page. Crowley was employed by Boris Johnson as his political adviser during his period as mayor of London, later writing a book about his experience working closely with Crosby on campaigns. He later went on to run a political campaigning company and became political director on Zac Goldsmith’s ill-fated mayoral bid. The Brexit supporter said his involvement in Mainstream Network was because “some who disliked the result have been actively trying to overturn it”. He did not comment on his links to Crosby but said: “I wanted to see the result actually delivered and give a voice to that majority so the democratic result is honoured.” Dawson, the public face of Britain’s Future, declined to comment on who has funded his enormous Facebook ad campaign or whether it was linked to Crosby or the Mainstream Network, instead saying he simply wanted to represent 17.4 million Brexit voters, adding: “This is my way of getting the point across to those in Westminster that the government should honour its manifesto and that the current deal is not what we voted for.” Solomon, the CTF employee, is also connected to a page called We are the 52%, which has spent more than £50,000 on pro-Brexit Facebook adverts and is fronted by a Conservative activist and former Vote Leave staffer Theodora Dickinson. Dickinson declined to comment on any links between her group and Crosby’s company but said remain campaigners “are using similar tactics and spending more” without fully declaring their financial backers, highlighting the £370,000 expenditure on Facebook adverts by the People’s Vote campaign and the £300,000 spent by Best for Britain. Solomon is also listed as an administrator on at least a dozen other pro-Brexit pages, which typically mix campaigning content with other unrelated interests and appear to have also spent money running an unknown number of pro-Brexit adverts. Pages used for the messaging include Small Business for Great Britain, Northern Industry, and Protecting British Heritage. The House of Commons digital, culture, media and sport select committee, which has led the way on investigating online disinformation, has repeatedly called for Facebook to reveal the identities of those who were funding Mainstream Network, suggesting they crossed an ethical line. “I believe there is a strong public interest in understanding who is behind the Mainstream Network, and that this information should be published,” the committee’s chairman, Damian Collins, said last month after Facebook refused to identify the individuals behind the page. “People should have a right to know who is targeting them with political advertisements and why. That is why the committee had called for a change in the law to outlaw these kind of dark adverts from secret campaigns,” he said. Although the documents point towards the individuals who are running the campaigns, it remains unclear who is ultimately picking up the substantial bill for this attempt to persuade MPs there is a grassroots uprising for a hard Brexit. CTF Partners, Carroll, and Solomon did not respond to requests for comment.
Rolling coverage of the day’s political developments as they happen, including Theresa May’s talks with Angela Merkel and Emmanuel Macron, and MPs debating how long the article 50 extension should be    That’s all from us this evening. Thanks for reading and for all the comments. Here’s a summary of the afternoon’s events: And, if you’d like to read yet more on the Tory infighting, my colleague Rowena Mason has the full story:  It emerged yesterday that the Conservatives were planning to contest the European parliamentary elections and had invited potential MEPs to put themselves forward. One person who will not be doing so, however, is David Bannerman – the Tory MEP for the East of England. After quite some consideration, I have decided today not to stand again as a Conservative MEP for the East of England if elections are called for 23 May 2019. I think it would be dishonourable for me personally to stand again as a Conservative MEP in these circumstances, particularly with my strong views on honouring the Brexit result. I am unable to defend the decision to call these elections and the arguments for yet further delay when the British people just want Brexit done. I strongly believe it is entirely wrong and counterproductive for these elections to be held at all. With nearly three years since the Referendum (of 23 June 2016) the British people are angrily demanding that the result be honoured and Brexit be delivered. Bannerman has said he would support the prime minister’s deal “only on the basis of getting the UK legally out of the EU”. Updated  Following talks between Theresa May and Emmanuel Macron in Paris, a Downing Street spokesman has said: The prime minister met with President Macron in Paris this afternoon, ahead of the EU Council meeting tomorrow. Following the prime minister’s letter to Donald Tusk last week, the leaders discussed the UK’s request for an extension of article 50 to 30 June, with the option to bring this forward if a deal is ratified earlier. The prime minister updated President Macron on the ongoing talks with the [Labour party] to agree a way forward that respects the result of the 2016 referendum. They also discussed upcoming European parliamentary elections with the PM saying that the government was working very hard to avoid the need for the UK to take part. The leaders also discussed the ongoing situation in Libya. The PM expressed her deep concern about the recent escalation and said it was important for the international community to work together to bring an end to the violence. Updated  Back in Westminster, the noises emanating from the Labour party in respect of the cross-party Brexit talks remain somewhat downbeat. A spokesperson has said: We had further detailed and wide-ranging talks with cabinet ministers and officials today. We have yet to see the clear shift in the government’s position that is needed to secure a compromise agreement. We have agreed to hold further talks on Thursday in an effort to break the Brexit deadlock, and find a compromise that can win support in Parliament and bring the country together. The party has repeatedly accused the prime minister of showing insufficient willingness to compromise during the negotiations; something Downing Street has denied. In reaction, the Liberal Democrat leader, Vince Cable, has said: The fact that talks seem to have broken down again is not a surprise, since neither side seemed interested in negotiating a compromise because they are more concerned with protecting party political interest. May and Corbyn must stop avoiding the elephant in the room; only a People’s Vote can secure a cast iron majority. The prime minister must now chair a cross-party committee, including the Liberal Democrats, SNP, Plaid Cymru, and independent MPs, to agree to a confirmatory referendum on the deal with an option to remain in the EU. If MPs commit to working together we can pull the UK back from the brink and ensure that the people, not politicians, have the final say on Brexit. Updated  Allied to the previous post, Sky News’ political editor, Faisal Islam, has seen a draft of the European Council’s conclusions that suggests the EU leaders are drawing up plans along the lines defined by Tusk: Here is the full draft Emergency summit conclusions: pic.twitter.com/5kO7OrQfjT  The president of the European Council, Donald Tusk, has written to EU leaders urging them to offer the UK a flexible extension to the article 50 process of up to one year. That would allow the UK to leave at any point within that period that it decides to do so, he says. There are times when you need to give time time.My letter to EU leaders ahead of tomorrow’s #EUCO: https://t.co/bAsz4Qx36s#Brexit The leaders are due to meet to discuss Brexit on Wednesday and the release of Tusk’s letter coincides with Parliament’s acceptance of Theresa May’s plan to ask for a delay to 30 June this year. But Tusk tells European leaders it is highly unlikely the UK can get a deal signed, sealed and delivered by that date. And Tusk insists the price of any such deal must be the UK’s acceptance that the withdrawal agreement stays as it is, though he says he would be open to further negotiation on the political declaration – the framework for the future relationship between the bloc and the UK. Our experience so far, as well as the deep divisions within the House of Commons, give us little reason to believe that the ratification process can be completed by the end of June. In reality, granting such an extension would increase the risk of a rolling series of short extensions and emergency summits, creating new cliff-edge dates. This, in turn, would almost certainly overshadow the business of the EU27 in the months ahead. The continued uncertainty would also be bad for our businesses and citizens. Finally, if we failed to agree on any next extension, there would be a risk of an accidental no-deal Brexit. He recommends that the European Council discuss alternative arrangements, including a flexible extension that would last “only as long as necessary and no longer than one year, as beyond that date we will need to decide unanimously on some key European projects”. The flexibility would allow to terminate the extension automatically, as soon as both sides have ratified the withdrawal agreement. The UK would be free to leave whenever it is ready. And the EU27 would avoid repeated Brexit summits. Importantly, a long extension would provide more certainty and predictability by removing the threat of constantly shifting cliff-edge dates. Furthermore, in the event of a continued stalemate, such a longer extension would allow the UK to rethink its Brexit strategy. The UK would remain a full, if departing, EU member and Tusk acknowledged some concerns among EU27 leaders – notably expressed by the French president, Emmanuel Macron (see 4.29pm) – that that would “pose risks for the functioning” of the bloc. To address them, we would need to agree on a number of conditions: No re-opening of the withdrawal agreement; no start of the negotiations on the future, except for the political declaration; the UK would have to maintain its sincere cooperation also during this crucial period, in a manner that reflects its situation as a departing member state. We should remember, however, that the United Kingdom will remain a member state with full rights and obligations. And, in any event, the UK can revoke article 50 at any time, as stated by the European Court of Justice. Finally, Tusk said the EU27 must approach the UK with a fraternal attitude, saying the two “want to remain friends and close partners ... Neither side should be allowed to feel humiliated at any stage in this difficult process”. May will address the leaders on Wednesday, before the EU27 hold a private meeting to agree their response to her request for a delay to 30 June 2019. Updated  Andrew Sparrow This is how the parties divided in the vote on the motion approving the PM’s decision to seek an article 50 extension until 30 June. For Labour: 223 Conservatives: 131 SNP: 33 Independents: 17 Lib Dems: 11 Plaid Cymru: 4 Greens: 1 Total: 420 Against Conservatives: 97 DUP: 9 Labour: 3 (Ronnie Campbell, Stephen Hepburn, Kate Hoey) Independents: 1 (Frank Field) Total: 110 And here are some key points that emerge from the figures. 80 Tory MPs did not vote to delay Brexit until June 30 including 12 ministers:Geoffrey CoxChris GraylingLiam FoxAndrea LeadsomBrandon LewisNadhim ZahawiKwasi KwartengKit MalthouseNus GhaniChris PincherJesse NormanKelly Tolhurst That’s all from me for today. My colleague Kevin Rawlinson is now taking over. Updated  Theresa May has won the vote on requesting an article 50 extension until 30 June by 420 votes to 110 - a majority of 310. Updated  Theresa May has arrived at the Elysee Palace for talks with the French president, Emmanuel Macron.  This is from the BBC’s Brussel correspondent, Adam Fleming. EU27 ambassadors will tonight discuss a draft document setting out a #Brexit extension lasting “only as long as necessary and, in any event, no longer than [XX.XX.XXXX]” and ending earlier if the Withdrawal Agreement is ratified.  In the Commons MPs are now voting on the motion to request an article 50 extension.
Ireland was streets ahead of the UK when it came to planning for Britain’s exit by  Rory Carroll and  Lisa O'Carroll  The possibility of the UK leaving the European Union blared like an air-raid siren in Government Buildings, the quadrangle of Portland stone and Wicklow granite in central Dublin that houses the taoiseach’s office. Officials summoned politicians, diplomats, business leaders, farming groups, academics and others to the complex off Upper Merrion Street. The guests climbed a beechwood staircase with a stained glass window, My Four Green Fields, representing Ireland’s four provinces. At the improvised summit all agreed that Britain’s exit from the EU would present an unprecedented threat to Irish interests. They agreed to meet monthly to brainstorm – discussions which led to a task force, a strategy, a plan. This was 2015. Few people had even heard of the word Brexit. It was a year before David Cameron called the referendum, two years before Theresa May declared “red lines” over the UK’s withdrawal. It was three years before she agreed to the Irish border backstop as an option and signed the withdrawal agreement that triggered a breakdown in Westminster. The roots of the UK’s political and constitutional crisis spread far and wide: decades of anti-EU propaganda, a Tory party civil war, a reckless Cameron gamble, a dogged, blinkered successor, a divided Labour party. And with a starring role, the backstop. A term once confined to rounders and baseball, it refers to an insurance policy to avoid a hard border between Northern Ireland and the Republic of Ireland in the event of the UK’s no-deal departure. The Irish government persuaded the EU to make the backstop a condition of the UK’s withdrawal. Supporters, including Tony Blair and John Major, say it is needed to protect the 1998 Good Friday agreement which drew a line under the Troubles and ended a three-decade conflict that claimed more than 3,600 lives. They say the return of border controls and infrastructure could wreck the peace process. Brexiters call the backstop a trap which could chain the UK to Brussels in a de facto customs union and undermine the union between Great Britain and Northern Ireland. Both sides agree that Dublin outplayed its former colonial master. While London dithered in the referendum aftermath, the Irish nimbly forged an alliance of all 27 member states. “I pay tribute to the Irish government and Ireland the way that ... you know ... people in Dublin really saw the issues a long way out, much more clearly, perhaps than people in London did,” a rueful Boris Johnson, the former British foreign secretary, admitted in January during a visit to Dublin. The story of the backstop is not of a flawlessly executed Celtic masterplan, however. Dublin conceived it fitfully and gradually in response to British contradictions and missteps. But once crystallised as a goal, the Irish pursued it hell for leather. “It was very clearly identified at the very early stages that Northern Ireland and the border would become an issue,” Helen McEntee, Ireland’s minister of state for European affairs, said in an interview this week. “The border came up at every meeting,” said Andrew Gilmore, deputy research director at the Institute of International and European Affairs thinktank, who attended stakeholder consultations. While the UK suffered from what some call “Brexit comprehension lag” the Irish were quick off the blocks. Enda Kenny, the then taoiseach, ordered the first Brexit impact study in 2014. Officials identified the impact on the economy, diplomatic ties, and crucially the Good Friday agreement and what Brexit would mean for the border. A further 85-page report was produced in November 2015 outlining consequences of a yes and a no vote. 2014: The first Brexit impact report identifies the border as an issue for the Good Friday agreement and single market. This leads to a second report in 2015 detailing options for Ireland if the UK votes to leave the EU. 24 June 2016: The day after the EU referendum, Dublin activates contingency plans to create a Brexit taskforce and ramps up diplomatic missions across the bloc. 17 January 2017: Theresa May’s Lancaster House declaration of 'red lines' convinces Dublin of the need for a border insurance policy. 29 April 2017: Dublin persuades the European commission to make the border a priority in guidelines for the first phase of the negotiations. It confirms the EU’s 'Ireland-first' policy. 4 December 2017: May is poised to sign up to 'regulatory alignment' between Northern Ireland and the Irish Republic, which would avert a hard border. But the Democratic Unionist party intervenes, saying it would weaken Northern Ireland’s place in the UK. May extends the backstop to the whole of the UK, angering Brexiters. It went into detail that barely troubled the leave campaign, including options for membership of the EEA, a customs union, bilateral trade agreements and the doomsday option of a no-deal exit, in which the UK and EU would default to World Trade Organization rules. After the shock of the no vote sunk in, Kenny quickly assembled a team of almost 100 people to work on Brexit. He beefed up embassies across EU capitals to convey a stark message: the border was not just about protecting the single market, it was about peace. Irish policymakers knew referendums could turn into opportunities for voters to kick the political establishment – it happened in Ireland numerous times. To neutralise the danger Kenny lobbied the EU to grant Cameron meaningful concessions in talks in early 2016 to help him win the referendum. He also warned Cameron to be extremely careful. All in vain. The EU concessions to Cameron were meagre and he bungled the campaign. “It’s often difficult to get information out to people, to make it clear what it is that you’re asking of them. So there was always a concern that it might not be as straightforward as people thought,” said McEntee, speaking from an office adorned with Irish and EU flags. Despite their forebodings, the referendum result shocked Irish officials. They had hoped to shelve the contingency plans. Instead they scrambled to develop them. “Those documents started as a basis and have evolved and grown legs and wings and developed into what we have now in terms of our strategy,” said McEntee. The Irish initially hoped bilateral talks could find a way to keep the border frictionless. The Good Friday agreement had fostered close ties with London. British officials often admired Government Buildings, an Edwardian gem designed by Sir Aston Webb, who also designed Buckingham Palace. But investigation of technical solutions, such as cameras or trusted traders, proved fruitless. In October 2016 Theresa May, who had replaced Cameron as prime minister, told the Tory party conference the UK would leave the single market, the first of her red lines. As she was speaking to appease the right wing of the party and neuter Ukip support in the country, the Irish government was growing increasingly worried about the border. In October Kenny agreed with the European commission president, Jean-Claude Juncker, that technical talks between officials in Brussels and Dublin would open. They met again in January 2017 and agreed “there was no technical solution” to the border. They were beginning to realise that only a political solution – specifically, regulatory alignment between Northern Ireland and the EU – could avert a hard border. This was the genesis of the backstop. That conviction grew when May gave her Lancaster House speech later in January, hardening her red lines, promising the UK would leave the customs union and the single market. Brexit did not mean Brexit; it meant hard Brexit. In Brussels and Dublin it was decided that the UK now “had to own” the border issue. All they had extracted out of Britain so far was a line in May’s speech that there would be “no return to the borders of the past”. “That was no good to us,” said one source. “That referenced watchtowers and guns, but this is not what the border issue was about, we were never going back there. This was about the customs union and the single market.” The turning point came a few months later in a keynote speech by Kenny, who for the first time indicated the bilateral approach was dead and avoiding a post-Brexit “hard border” was now vital for the republic’s national interest. It was a shift in Ireland’s position, born out of the investigations into the border technical issues conducted with the commission over the previous five months. The Irish goal was to get the border into a legally binding withdrawal agreement – Dublin’s point of maximum leverage – rather than future trade relations, when Dublin would struggle to be heard. Rumours that Ireland was angling for a legally binding solution spooked the then Brexit secretary, David Davis. A scheduled meeting with Ireland’s deputy prime minister was mysteriously cancelled. “When they heard what was potentially to be discussed, he suddenly wasn’t available,” said a source. “The relationship with David Davis was not good.” The Irish discounted Downing Street promises to keep the border as frictionless as possible, viewing the British as “slippery”, saying the right things but not necessarily delivering, said a source close to the talks. “They had decades of experience of negotiations with the British over Northern Ireland and knew what they would be like.” Ireland was a midget with a big advantage: British ineptitude. Downing Street failed to plan for Brexit before the referendum and never caught up. Conservative party divisions split the cabinet and sabotaged attempts to clarify goals and strategy. May compounded her difficulties by calling an election in June 2017 that lost her parliamentary majority and made her dependent on the Democratic Unionist party (DUP). The DUP opposed any special status for Northern Ireland lest it weaken the union. The prime minister tried to appease the DUP by widening the backstop to encompass the UK, not just Northern Ireland, but this angered Brexiters. Downing Street’s road to perdition began with three incompatible commitments: leaving the single market and customs union, the UK jumping together, and no hard border in Ireland. Logic said you could have two, not three. Brexiters squared this by saying any backstop would be a “convenient fiction” and not really legally binding. “Cakeism” – wanting to have your cake and eat it – entered the political lexicon. Ivan Rogers, the UK’s ambassador to Brussels, resigned in despair at “fantasies and delusions”. After Leo Varadkar succeeded Kenny in June 2017 the Irish pressed their advantage. The new taoiseach wanted a “win”, said one Fine Gael party colleague, and squeezing the Brits proved popular. A government colleague said Varadkar, a policy wonk with a direct style, was simply pursuing the national interest. “He’s Mr Spock. He looks at what’s logical and tries to operate on that basis.” Unlike May, besieged on all fronts, Varadkar enjoyed support from opposition parties and media commentators, who treated Brexit as a national emergency. The taoiseach relied on seasoned diplomats – Rory Montgomery, Declan Kelleher, John Callinan – and a tightknit cabinet team. McEntee operated from his office. Simon Coveney, his deputy and foreign minister, operated from Iveagh House, a 10-minute walk across St Stephen’s Green. Phil Hogan, Ireland’s EU commissioner, provided intelligence from Brussels. Britain assumed EU players would override Ireland. Surely German car makers and French farmers would not let fussing about a drizzly border between Derry and Dundalk imperil an orderly UK exit? But Berlin and Paris rebuffed Downing Street. Solidarity belonged to the member staying in the club, not the one leaving. Some had a personal stake in the backstop. Michel Barnier, the EU’s chief negotiator, used to be a commissioner who ran peace programmes in Northern Ireland. Baltic states with an eye on Russia appreciated the bloc supporting a minnow against a heavyweight. Some EU members needed wooing. “There was a feeling that people in Europe had forgotten about Northern Ireland … we needed to re-educate them,” said a source. Varadkar cited an Irish Times article about a 1972 IRA attack on a customs post. Ministers racked up air miles courting support and invited counterparts to visit the border. The Irish government had a semi-permanent base camp at the Carrickdale hotel near the old border customs post at Jonesborough on the road between Dublin and Belfast. It hosted a revolving cast of officials, foreign affairs ministers and premiers including Xavier Bettel, Michel Barnier, and Donald Tusk. It was vital to show that the border was an invisible line across fields and communities, said McEntee. “People see that and they understand how complex it is.” When former police officers brief them about the Troubles “it becomes much more real”, she said. And so unfolded a historic reversal. After the Anglo-Irish war in 1921 Dublin’s envoys bowed to British pressure and agreed to partition, creating a 310-mile border. Ireland’s ensuing civil war claimed the life of its chief negotiator, Michael Collins, but David Lloyd George claimed to have solved the Irish question. Almost a century later, another British premier is tangled in a deal involving that same border. It has sundered her party and parliament. Her pleas to reopen the agreement have failed. It is a great feat for Irish diplomacy. But Dublin is not celebrating. Unless the UK ratifies the withdrawal deal or cancels Brexit it may yet crash out of the EU with no deal, wreaking havoc on both sides of the Irish border and rendering the backstop a hollow victory. The Irish pay history some heed. They do not claim to have solved the British question. • Tomorrow: Daniel Boffey on how Brussels outmanoeuvred the UK • The caption to the picture of Leo Varadkar and Michel Barnier was amended on 18 April 2019 because an earlier version said Varadkhar was on the left. This has been corrected.
UK also has option to leave in June if PM can secure Commons support for deal Follow all the latest developments - live   Britain will remain as a member state of the EU until 31 October, with the option to leave earlier if Theresa May can secure Commons support for the Brexit deal, after a Franco-German carve-up of the UK’s future. A marathon six-hour debate among the EU leaders concluded with the prime minister being offered a longer extension than she had sought but providing a new Halloween no deal cliff-edge to focus minds in Westminster. “This extension is as flexible as I expected and a little bit shorter than I expected but it is still enough to find the best possible solution,” the European council president, Donald Tusk, told a media conference that began after 2am local time. He said of the extra six months of EU membership: “Please do not waste this time.” The EU would also hold a symbolic June summit to review the UK’s behaviour as a member state following an outspoken intervention by the French president, Emmanuel Macron, about the need to avoid a “rogue” Britain undermining the European project. Speaking afterwards, Theresa May repeatedly ducked questions about her future as prime minister, after having previously said she would not accept an extension beyond 30 June. She simply insisted that the UK “can still leave on May 22 and not hold those European parliamentary elections” if parliament passes the withdrawal deal. May also once again blamed MPs for being the cause of public frustration over the failure to implement Brexit. Asked whether she should apologise for the UK still being in the EU, she said: “Over the last three months I have voted three times to leave the European Union. If sufficient members of parliament had voted with me in January we would already be out of the European Union.” The prime minister will now head back to London to give a statement in the House of Commons in the early afternoon. During the day Macron had sought to maintain the pressure on Britain to act with an “enhanced duty of sincere cooperation” during the extra period of membership following the threats from Brexiters, including Jacob Rees-Mogg MP, that the UK could seek to disrupt the bloc from within. The June summit will be an opportunity to “take stock” but it is not a cliff-edge, Jean-Claude Juncker said. After the new date was announced, Macron said leaders had found “the best possible compromise” because 31 October preserved EU unity, allowed the British more time and preserved “the good functioning of the European Union”. The autumn deadline provides an opportunity for the EU to bring Brexit to an end before the conclusion of Juncker’s tenure as European commission president on 1 November. British MEPs would need to be elected on the 23 May if the Commons does not pass the withdrawal agreement by then, or otherwise leave by 1 June. Tusk, who had proposed a full year extension to allow Westminster to break the impasse, said he could not discount the leaders having to deal with a further extension request in October. “I think it is always better to have a piece of something than all of nothing. Six months, more than six months, it could be enough for a good solution if there is a good will and majority for a good solution in the House of Commons.” Tusk added that “maybe we are not happy but satisfied”, adding that the extra time opened a further opportunity for Britain to “revoke article 50 and cancel Brexit altogether”. Juncker admitted that the long debate among the EU27 had been a “bit difficult” but joked that he liked the deal as his time a commission president would end at midnight on 31 October and he might have to leave a debate about a further extension early. The prime minister of Malta, Joseph Muscat, tweeted: “A Brexit extension until 31 October is sensible since it gives time to UK to finally choose its way. The review in June will allow [European council] to take stock of the situation.” The compromise autumn date was carved out after the EU’s Franco-German engine found itself divided over how to deal with Britain’s political crisis. A senior EU source described it as “26 to one”. The German chancellor, Angela Merkel, had clashed with Macron, both over Berlin’s insistence that May’s government can be trusted, and that a no-deal scenario should not be risked by offering up only a short delay such as one ending on 30 June, as requested by the British prime minister. Merkel argued that a short delay would not offer any prospect of the impasse in Westminster being broken and the delay should instead end on 31 December. She had claimed that the biggest incentive for Conservative MPs to back the deal lay in the threat of having to hold European elections due to a failure to complete Brexit. But Macron warned against such a long extension, arguing that a no-deal threat should remain and that there were insufficient guarantees that the British government would act as a responsible member state. Sources suggested Paris had “gone in hard”, and forced EU capitals towards the shorter date. The French president also insisted on the redrafting of the EU’s summit communique, writing in that the UK – during any extra time as a member state – would have to “refrain from any measure which could jeopardise the attainment of the union’s objectives, in particular when participating in the decision-making processes of the union”, according to a leak obtained by the Guardian. The EU27 also emphasised their right to meet without the UK on key long-term decisions. The differences between Paris and Berlin had been evident earlier in the day when Merkel told the Bundestag that May was likely to get a longer extension than she needed, while Macron told reporters on arrival at the summit that “nothing had been decided”, dismissing talk of a long extension as rumours. Macron insisted on clarity from May about what Britain wants, warning: “Nothing should compromise the European project.” The Guardian understands that May had not pushed back against the suggestion of a long extension in her one-hour address to the other 27 leaders before their debate, instead insisting that her priority was to be able to leave once the withdrawal agreement was approved. The prime minister also asked the leaders to avoid a situation in which she would have to return to Brussels to ask for a further extension. As EU leaders had gathered to discuss an extension to article 50 of about nine months, May publicly dropped her promise not to allow a delay to Brexit beyond 30 June while she was prime minister. Sources said she would abide by her decision to step down only once a Brexit deal with the EU had been passed by parliament, meaning she looks likely to stay on and keep trying to push through a withdrawal agreement for as long as it takes. Arriving at the talks, May signalled she would accept a much longer delay from EU leaders – expected to be nine to 12 months – as long as there was a “break clause” allowing the UK to leave as soon as MPs approve a deal with a meaningful vote. “What matters, I think, is I have asked for an extension to 30 June but what is important is that any extension enables us to leave at the point at which we ratify a withdrawal agreement. So we could leave on 22 May and start to build our brighter future,” she said. The six-month extension is politically explosive for May because she had promised that “as prime minister” she would not countenance any delay beyond June 30 that would involve the UK having to take part in European elections. Eurosceptics will also be furious that six months is not enough timeto replace her as Conservative leader and use the remaining extension for a “reset” of Brexit strategy – through an attempt at fresh negotiations or gaining parliamentary backing for a no-deal exit through a general election. In contrast, it would be enough time for May to negotiate a softer Brexit compromise either with Labour or parliament more widely involving a customs union or even a second referendum. The Guardian understands that the Conservative party rules that protect May from a leadership challenge until 12 December had been a motivating factor in the offer of a lengthy Brexit delay.
Nigel Farage vows to ‘rescue democracy’ as he unveils sister of leading Tory Brexiter Jacob   The sister of the Conservative MP Jacob Rees-Mogg has been unveiled as a candidate for Nigel Farage’s new Brexit party in the European elections, as the former Ukip leader said he intended to put “the fear of God” into MPs. Annunziata Rees-Mogg, who has twice failed to get elected as a Tory MP, was introduced by Farage at the party’s campaign launch at a factory in Coventry on Friday. Addressing cheering supporters, the 40-year-old former Telegraph journalist said: “I joined the Conservative party in 1984 and this is not a decision I have made lightly – to leave a party for which I have fought at every election since 1987, from Maggie Thatcher through to Theresa May. I know which one I’d rather have representing us now.” Rees-Mogg said Farage’s party must “rescue our democracy” and show that “the politicians are not our masters – they are to do our bidding”. Rees-Mogg said she would be “stunned [and] unbelievably surprised” if her brother, who chairs the hard-Brexit European Research Group faction of Tory MPs, followed her out of the party. “He sees one way of achieving Brexit and a return to democracy, and I see a different one,” she said. Richard Tice, a multimillionaire property tycoon and founder of campaign group Leave Means Leave, was unveiled as the chair of the new party, which claims to have 40 “high-quality” candidates for the European elections on 23 May. Tice was a co-chair of Leave.EU, which was fined £60,000 by the Electoral Commission in February for campaign violations in conjunction with Arron Banks’s firm Eldon Insurance. Farage said earlier on Friday the party would not take any donations from Banks, who he said had been “very badly burned” since the referendum, referring to questions over the source of the £8m that Banks donated to the pro-Brexit campaign. In a speech to more than 100 supporters gathered in a chilly metalworks plant in Coventry, Farage claimed his party had received more than £750,000 in small donations in 10 days. He said it would accept big donations but would be “thrilled” if the party could be bankrolled by ordinary voters. Farage promised to unveil “the most impressive list of candidates any political party has put before the electorate”, before introducing Rees-Mogg. Other candidates announced on Friday were Ben Habib, a businessman and former Tory donor, the pro-Brexit campaigner June Mummery, and former teacher Dr Alka Sehgal Cuthbert. “I do believe that we can win these European elections and that we can again start to put the fear of God into our members of parliament in Westminster,” he said. “They deserve nothing less than that after the way they’ve treated us over this betrayal. Our task and our mission is to change politics for good. “I said that if I ever did come back into the political fray, next time it would be no more Mr Nice Guy, and I mean it. I am angry about what has happened. I said many years ago I wanted to cause an earthquake in British politics. Now what I am fighting for, and with your support what we will attempt to achieve, is a democratic revolution in British politics.” Speaking earlier on BBC Radio 4’s Today programme, Farage described the departure of two founding officials over Islamophobic or racist tweets as “teething problems” and said the party would be “deeply intolerant of all forms of intolerance”. It emerged later that one of the candidates announced, Mummery, has re-tweeted a message from a far-right account on Twitter. Her timeline showed that last week Mummery forwarded a message about the EU from an account called Active Patriot UK, the profile picture for which shows someone in a paramilitary-style balaclava in front of an English flag. The account strongly backs the anti-Islam activist Tommy Robinson. Among other tweets from the account is a video of Paul Golding, leader of the banned far-right group Britain First, and a misogynistic joke about a female newspaper reporter. The Brexit party was contacted for comment. Farage said he had put £1,000 on his party to finish top of the polls in the European elections at a price of 3/1 and that, “with a bit of luck, a following wind, trying our hardest”, the campaign could force Britain’s exit from the EU without a deal. “The quickest way to a free-trade deal is we leave on WTO rules and, you know something, the European Union will come running down the street after us wanting a tariff-free deal,” he said to loud cheers. Farage denied his party and Ukip would split the pro-Brexit vote, arguing that “middle England, decent people” would not vote for his former party, which he said had become “completely obsessed” by Islam and had a “fairly loutish fringe” and was now a party associated “with violence, criminal records and thuggery”. Gerard Batten, the Ukip leader, hit back at Farage on Twitter, calling him a “self-serving hypocrite” whose party was not a real political force.
Civil service to stand down its no-deal contingency plans in light of new departure date   The government has stood down an army of 6,000 civil servants who had been preparing for a no-deal Brexit, at an estimated cost of £1.5bn. The civil servants who had been seconded from elsewhere will now return to their normal duties, but there is no clear role for an estimated 4,500 new recruits after article 50 was extended until Halloween. More than 16,000 civil servants in total have been working on Brexit. The Labour party’s Hilary Benn said it was a “costly price” to pay for Theresa May’s belligerent insistence of keeping a no-deal on the table. “It was important to plan for all contingencies, but this is the huge cost of the prime minister repeatedly saying: ‘My deal or no deal’ when she knew that leaving without a deal was not in the national interest. This is one example of how Brexit is proving to be very costly for our country,” said Benn, chair of the influential Brexit select committee. The Cabinet Office made the decision to reverse the no-deal plans at a meeting on Thursday morning. “In common with the rest of government, we have stood down our no-deal operational planning with immediate effect. This morning, at a meeting chaired by the cabinet secretary, we agreed that the objective is to ensure we wind down our no-deal planning in a careful, considered and orderly way,” said a letter leaked to Sky News. A Downing Street spokesman said: “As a responsible government, we’ve been preparing for over two years to minimise any disruption in the event of no deal. In light of this week’s developments, departments will make sensible decisions about the timing and pace at which some of this work is progressing given that the date we leave the EU has changed, but we will absolutely continue to make all necessary preparations.” Brexiter Conservative MP Steve Baker branded the decision to stand down the no-deal operations as “sheer spite”. Sheer spite, I regret to say. Very sad. Officials have worked exceptionally hard to deliver our preparedness and deserve better https://t.co/eWxBADM4ue May’s contingency operations have impacted nearly all departments in the civil service and elsewhere in the public sector including police, hospitals and schools. Kent county council said it was standing down Operation Brock from Thursday night after local MP and May ally Damian Green said it should be “lifted as soon as possible” after the European council Brexit delay. “If we are definitely not leaving at the end of this week then I see no reason to continue with Operation Brock and I hope it can be lifted as soon as possible,” he told Kent Online. Highways England staff had deployed 80 officers from elsewhere in the country to patrol roads in Kent at a cost to the taxpayer of £119 per officer a night in hotels and food. That amounted to £66,000 a week alone for Operation Brock, which was activated three weeks ago to guard against gridlock flowing from ferry delays in Dover. Kent said it could reverse the contraflow system on a 14-mile stretch on the M20 over a weekend but it would take up to three weeks to remove the concrete barriers. Elsewhere senior civil servants at the departments of health, transport, environment and the Home Office are in talks with politicians on what to do with the army of new recruits who may not be needed for six months. In March the National Audit Office revealed that £1.5bn had been allocated across Whitehall for no-deal contingencies under an umbrella Operation Yellowhammer project. Its report put the Home Office at the top spender with £400m allocated for new border force and other officials and IT systems, including the “settled status” app for EU citizens. Michael Gove’s environment department was the next biggest spender. Only two weeks ago it was still recruiting for new staff in the US. In February it emerged that it had turned to the private sector for a gold command centre in Whitehall that could stay open “potentially for two years”. The emergency control centre was to have a team of officers producing briefing notes for ministers “at pace” and checking the “battle rhythm” for emerging urgent policy changes. These may not be needed now. John Manzoni, the chief executive of the civil service and the cabinet secretary Mark Sedwill have at the same time written to the public affairs and constitutional affairs committee to confirm the scale of the no-deal operations in the civil service. In January Mazoni revealed it had redeployed about 5,000 staff for no-deal contingencies. But now the civil service bosses have disclosed that “across the civil service 16,118 EU exit posts have been filled”. The Department of Health and Social Care said it was considering what to do with its medicines stockpiles following the latest article 50 extension. “Leaving the EU with a deal remains the government’s priority. We are considering the impact on our EU exit preparations and are working closely with our stakeholders to review our position,” a spokeswoman said. The Department for Transport could also be left with a hefty no-deal bill for ferry contracts and a logistics hub in Belgium for stockpiling of medicines. It also said it “reviewing contingency plans to ensure costs to the taxpayer are minimised and are already selling additional capacity” on the ferries “back to the market”. Brexiter MP Steve Baker branded the decision to stand down the no-deal operations as “sheer spite”.
After marathon Brexit talks, EU leaders have offered delay, with Donald Tusk warning Britain: ‘Please do not waste this time’    Andrew Sparrow Sometimes the most significant event is the one that does not happen. Two weeks ago, on 29 March, when the UK was supposed to be leaving the EU but article 50 had been extended for two weeks, there were large protests in Parliament Square involving thousands of people furious that their Brexit was not happening. Last night Theresa May accepted another extension, not for two weeks but for almost seven months. And yet in the Commons the Brexiter response was close to subdued. True, Sir Bill Cash, the veteran Tory Brexiter, asked May if she would resign, and a few other Brexit hardliners criticised her in strong terms. But there was a lot less bile and rage than we have from them in some previous exchanges, many of the most senior Brexiters were not present or did not speak, and overall May sounded a bit more resilient than she has done of late. It probably had a lot to do with the fact that many MPs are feeling knackered. But the absence of a mighty backlash may also reflect an awareness amongst Brexiters that, although they would love to get rid of the prime minister, at present they don’t have the leverage to do so. Here are the main points from the exchanges. So let us use the opportunity of the recess to reflect on the decisions that will have to be made swiftly on our return after Easter. And let us then resolve to find a way through this impasse. So that we can leave the European Union with a deal as soon as possible. So that we can avoid having to hold those European parliamentary elections. And above all, so that we can fulfil the democratic decision of the referendum, deliver Brexit and move our country forward. This is our national duty as elected members of this House – and nothing today is more pressing or more vital. Does the prime minister appreciate the anger that her abject surrender last night has generated across the country, having broken promises 100 times not to extend the time? ... Will she resign? May said Cash knew the answer to that. She also brushed aside a complaint from Peter Bone, another Tory Brexiter, who asked her whether she still stood by what she told him at PMQs three weeks ago about how she would not consider delaying Brexit beyond 30 June while she was still PM. (See 2.24pm.) I think there is actually more agreement in relation to a customs union than is often given credit for when different language is used.  We’ve been very clear that we want to obtain the benefits of a customs union - no tariffs, no rules of origin checks and no quotas - while being able to operate our own independent trade policy.  The Labour party has said they want a say in trade policy - the question is how we ensure we can provide for this country to be in charge of its trade policy in the future. The current session of parliament is due to end sometime soon. There is some talk around of extending this session beyond two years. Can I say, I think many in this house, including on this bench, would regard that as something that is not acceptable? May refused to give Dodds the assurance he wanted, although when Labour’s Chris Bryant raised the same issue, she said her focus was on getting her deal through parliament. Even though the DUP are the Tories’ confidence and supply partners, May also responded robustly when the DUP MP Sammy Wilson accused her of always giving in to the EU. (See 2.43pm.) Sure fire sign that the end is nigh: Theresa May goes to war with the DUP's Sammy Wilson. You can actually see that Mr Wilson is taken aback by the PM's angry tone. pic.twitter.com/26JguxjhAn That’s all from me for today. And until after Easter, because I will be off. But colleagues will be writing the blog in my place for the next week. Thanks for the comments. Updated  Jessica Elgot Talks with Labour will not continue “for the sake of it” if both sides cannot agree a deal and party leaders would instead attempt to agree a way to get a parliamentary majority for a Brexit outcome, Downing Street has said. Labour officials are meeting Theresa May’s chief of staff Gavin Barwell this afternoon, which is likely to lead to further talks between ministers and their opposites on Friday. Theresa May’s spokesman said the hope was to agree a deal that meant the UK could leave the EU before June 30, the date the prime minister has previously said she would not to extend beyond. At a lobby briefing, he went on: If we work at pace, the House of Commons can come together, we can agree a deal, ratify it and get out before having to do EU parliamentary elections. There is an opportunity here and we ought not to lose sight of that. We have already started the process with the leader of the opposition and it’s right we see that continue to what we hope will be a successful conclusion. We have stressed the urgency because there is an opportunity to avoid EU elections and to bring a resolution for greater certainty.  Bluntly, we will not continue to talk for the sake of it.  But we believe the discussion and dialogue we are having is valuable and we want to see that continue while we think we are making progress. We are invested in this and [the PM] told fellow leaders last night ... this is not the usual way of doing things in British politics, it’s much more familiar to some EU leaders in the way that they work but it’s not very typical for the House of Commons. Should that not come to fruition, there would be a way, if we could agree a process with the Labour party’s participation, for the house to express its preference on options and she also made the point that in any event, we will have to introduce and agree and pass the withdrawal agreement bill. A plan has been discussed with Labour, though not agreed, to bring forward the withdrawal agreement bill, which could be a way to attempt to bypass a meaningful vote in parliament and allow MPs to amend the bill as a route to try to achieve a parliamentary majority. Downing Street said it wanted to come to agreement with Labour about how the process for finding parliamentary consensus would work.  “We have tried this twice before and we hope by working with the opposition in a more bipartisan way we can arrive at a series of options that allow us to avoid a situation where the house is asked for its verdict and, bluntly, can’t come up with one,” May’s spokesman said. Number 10 said it would not be a waste of time for MPs to now have a short break from Westminster. “Fundamentally, people could use a break,” the spokesman said. “Everybody should take a break in a way they feel is most appropriate.” Asked if the PM is planning on taking a holiday, Downing Street hinted that a break could be on the cards. “We will come back to you with her plans,” her spokesman said.   Emmanuel Macron’s tough-guy stance at the EU summit – refusing the UK a much longer Brexit extension – was partly down to the French president’s personality, but his reasoning was political, my colleague Angelique Chrisafis explains in an analysis of why Macron acted as he did at last night’s summit. Here article is here.  Libby Brooks Nicola Sturgeon has written to Theresa May asking her to include the SNP government in ongoing Brexit talks with Labour, as the first minister confirmed that she is now ready to set out her long-awaited plans for a second independence referendum to the Scottish parliament after it returns from Easter recess. In the letter to May, Sturgeon wrote: “We now have the gift of more time from the EU, and that must be used constructively to re-set the UK government approach. Your ongoing talks with the leader of the opposition should now broaden to include other parties, the devolved administrations, business and civic society, and open up the range of options on the table in an effort to reach a genuine consensus.” Earlier in the day, in an interview with Bauer Radio, Sturgeon said:  Obviously we still don’t have clarity about the future of the UK but I’ve always said that when we got to the end of this phase of negotiations I would set out my thinking on where or what that meant for Scotland. Had parliament been recalled today I would have had the opportunity to make a statement in general about the implications of Brexit, so after the recess I will take stock with the Scottish parliament about the implications of last night’s developments ... and what it means for Scotland in the longer term. The way the Easter holidays have fallen mean that Sturgeon will face some pressure of time: Holyrood recess officially ends on April 23rd, and SNP spring conference – where a heated debate is anticipated around the question of which currency an independent Scotland should use – is the following weekend. Sturgeon has pledged to set out her plans before parliament in the first instance, but has been under pressure from party activists and some senior parliamentarians who want her to hold a second independence referendum as soon as possible.  Charles Walker, a Tory, says May take a few days off. And the chief whip should get some sleep too. May says she thinks it will be good for all MPs to reflect on what happens next away from the chamber. And that’s it. The PM’s statement is over. I will post a summary soon.  Rehman Chishti, a Conservative, says taking part in the European elections will give legitimacy to far-right extremists. May says she wants to ensure the UK does not need to participate in those elections.  The Conservative MP Derek Thomas asks if it still the plan for the transition period to end in December 2020. May says that the transition can still end at the end of 2020, and that the government will work to ensure it does.  Asked if she can be sure that he European parliament will ratify any deal in a timely way, and that it will not hold things up to force the UK to participate in the European elections, May says the European parliament can ratify the deal before Westminster has.   May says she is grateful to EU leaders who attended the summit yesterday. Some broke off election campaigning, and one postponed a trip to Vietnam to be there.  Labour’s Rupa Huq says she will back May’s deal if it is subject to a confirmatory referendum. That is her compromise. What is May’s? May says constituents want to be able to move on. Having a second referendum would not allow that, she says.  Labour’s Seema Malhotra asks who May will include in the forum she plans to set up to consider what happens next with Brexit. May says first she needs to pass her deal. After that, in the second stage of the process, she will engage with businesses, unions and civil society.  Labour’s Stella Creasy asks May if she agrees that the best way to consult on what should happen next with Brexit would be to hold a citizens’ assembly. May says she will soon make an announcement on how she will solicit views on what should happen next.  Here are some lines from the Number 10 afternoon lobby briefing, from the Times’ Sam Coates, the Telegraph’s Christopher Hope and ITV’s Carl Dinnen. Number 10 spokesman, in briefing after TM statement: “People could use a break” ... “everybody should take a break in the way they feel most appropriate.”When holiday becomes policy.... NEW Number 10 has refused repeatedly to say if Theresa May will campaign in the European Parliament elections A Number 10 spokesman says the C&S Deal is not dependent on Parliamentary sessions but lasts for two financial years.  Martin Vickers, a Conservative, asks for an assurance that May will never seek a further article 50 extension. May thanks Vickers for supporting the deal, but she ignores his question.  Labour’s Mary Creagh says May will not get a stable majority for any Brexit legislation in the Commons unless she includes plans for a people’s vote, which she says is Labour policy passed at conference.  Jonathan Djanogly, a Conservative, asks if there is a structure to the talks with Labour. Will MPs know more after the recess? May says, if the UK is to pass a deal in time to stop it needing to take part in the European elections, a timetable will apply.  Labour’s Chris Bryant asks May is she plans to keep this session of parliament going until 31 October. May says her focus with parliamentary time at the moment is getting her deal passed.  Antoinette Sandbach, a Tory pro-European, says her constituents are pleased to see the government in talks with Labour. She says a survey after the referendum showed only 35% of people who voted leave thought that would mean leaving the single market and the customs union. And she tells May he confidence and supply partners, the DUP, are undermining confidence and not supply the votes.  Labour’s Karen Buck asks May when she will decide whether she can bring forward an EU withdrawal agreement bill. May says it will depend how the talks with Labour go.
PM seeks to agree compromise withdrawal plan with Labour that could lead to softer Brexit   Theresa May is to ask for another brief Brexit extension in order to seek a compromise withdrawal plan with the Labour party, she has announced, signalling the likelihood of Downing Street backing a softer Brexit. In a brief TV statement inside No 10 following a seven-hour cabinet meeting, the prime minister said she would hold talks with Jeremy Corbyn to seek a Brexit plan they could agree on and “both stick to”. In response, Corbyn said he was “very happy” to take part in the talks, and said he accepted the need to go into the talks in a spirit of cross-party cooperation. However, strongly pro-Brexit Conservative MPs expressed outrage at the plan. Boris Johnson said he feared it would lead to “a very bad deal indeed”, while Jacob Rees-Mogg said the prime minister wanted to collaborate with “a known Marxist”. In her statement May said that if agreement with the Labour leader was impossible, the plan would be to put to a vote in parliament a series of Brexit options, with the government committing to enact whichever idea won support. This would require another extension to article 50, May said, but added that she hoped this would not go beyond 22 May, thus ensuring the UK would not need to take part in European elections. “This is a difficult time for everyone,” she said. “Passions are running high on all sides of the argument. But we can and must find the compromises to deliver what the British people voted for.” The prime minister’s move would seem to point inevitably to a softer form of Brexit. Labour has made it plain it will not back any plan without customs union membership, and a runoff vote in parliament could lead to even closer ties with the EU. In his response Corbyn said: “We will meet the prime minister. We recognise that she has made a move. “I recognise my responsibility to represent the people that supported Labour in the last election and the people who didn’t support Labour but nevertheless want certainty and security for their own future and that’s the basis on which we will meet her and we will have those discussions.” It remains to be seen how leave-minded ministers in May’s cabinet will react. However, members of the hard-Brexit-backing European Research Group of Tory MPs responded with fury. Speaking after a meeting of the group Rees-Mogg, who chairs the ERG, said: “You do find that leaders who decide to go with the opposition rather than their own party find their own party doesn’t plainly follow.” He added: “I think getting the support of a known Marxist is not likely to instil confidence in Conservatives.” Business groups expressed cautious optimism but called for swift results. Adam Marshall, the head of the British Chambers of Commerce, said: “The clock is still ticking, and avoiding a messy and disorderly exit from the EU is still the top priority for our business communities. The government must take firm action, now, to ensure that this is not allowed to happen by default.” May’s Brexit plan has been rejected by the Commons three times, and two attempts by MPs to find a different preferred option have both ended in deadlock. The prime minister said the endless delay was “doing damage to our politics”, but ruled out a no-deal departure. She said: “I have always been clear that we could make a success of no deal in the long term, but leaving with a deal is the best solution.” May praised the “best efforts of MPs” to find a solution – a contrast to her last and much-criticised Downing Street statement, in which she appeared to blame parliament for the impasse – but said this had not been possible. “So today I am taking action to break the logjam: I am offering to sit down with the leader of the opposition and to try to agree a plan that we would both stick to, to ensure that we leave the European Union and that we do so with a deal,” she said. “The ideal outcome of this process would be to agree an approach on a future relationship that delivers on the result of the referendum, that both the leader of the opposition and I could put to the house for approval, and which I could then take to next week’s European council. “However, if we cannot agree on a single unified approach, then we would instead agree a number of options for the future relationship that we could put to the house in a series of votes to determine which course to pursue.” She added: “Crucially, the government stands ready to abide by the decision of the house.” For this to happen, May said, Labour “would need to agree to this too”.
Sources say prime minister’s red lines remain an obstacle in talks with Labour   Talks between Labour and the government are unlikely to advance much further in the coming week unless Theresa May moves on her red lines over a future customs union, sources close to the talks have suggested. David Lidington, who is leading the government’s talks with Labour, said a compromise would have to be reached but played down suggestions that a government shift was imminent and added that Labour would also have to move. Labour has suggested the ball is in the government’s court and, while the opposition will engage on other topics including workers’ rights and security, the key question on customs arrangements remains unresolved. “She needs to take a political decision to move off her red lines – or not,” one source said. Lidington said both sides had common ground on future customs arrangements but refused to say whether the government was prepared to agree to Jeremy Corbyn’s central demand for a common external tariff policy with the EU. “We think it is possible to get the benefits of a customs union but still have the flexibility for the UK to pursue an independent trade policy on top of that with other countries outside the EU. Labour has a different approach,” he told the BBC’s Andrew Marr Show. “If we are going to reach an agreement there is going to have to be movement on both sides.” The government has said three working groups will be established next week: security talks between the Brexit secretary, Steve Barclay, and his opposite number, Keir Starmer; environmental protections with Michael Gove and his shadow, Sue Hayman; and consumers’ and workers’ rights between the business secretary, Greg Clark, and his shadow, Rebecca Long-Bailey. Sources suggested the chancellor, Philip Hammond, could meet the shadow chancellor, John McDonnell. And a meeting between party chiefs when MPs return to Westminster is being planned to assess the progress that had been made. Lidington said the two sides “would hope to take stock of where we are as soon as parliament gets back after Easter recess but I don’t think this question can be allowed to drag out”. He said there was “no date ringed in the calendar” for the talks to end but if agreement could not be reached on some form of Brexit deal then he hoped the two sides would be able to agree a binding mechanism for parliament to agree a way forward. “What we want to do is agree a set of options with a system for making a choice with parliament actually having to come up with a preferred option rather than voting against everything,” he said. May and Corbyn are not expected to be involved in the talks this week during the Easter recess, though Tory MPs expect speculation over the prime minister’s position and leadership jostling to continue. The former Tory leader Iain Duncan Smith said May should resign next month despite her failure to pass a withdrawal agreement. “I know that the prime minister has already said she’s going. She said she would go as and when the agreement was ratified, which was looking at around about May, June. I think those dates still stand,” he told Sky’s Sophy Ridge on Sunday. “I think that what the PM has to do is aim everything now towards departure before the Euros [elections], which would then allow her to step away having done what she said she would do, getting the UK out of the European Union one way or the other, and then we can have another leadership election and pick a new leader, which is the way it has to be.” Two former chairs of the 1922 Committee of backbench Tory MPs, Michael Spicer and Archie Hamilton, said party rules could be changed to allow a leadership challenge sooner than December. Writing in the Sunday Telegraph, the two peers said there was “nothing standing in their way” if MPs agreed to change the rules, though the committee’s current chair, Sir Graham Brady, said he was “less certain that it would be possible to change the rules during the current period of grace”. However, the former party chairman Sir Patrick McLoughlin warned those agitating for a swift leadership change that installing a hard Brexiter in No 10 would not necessarily solve the Conservatives’ electoral problems. “Defining ourselves as the Brexit party, pursuing the hardest form of Brexit with a parliament that will not deliver it, is a recipe for paralysis in government and suicide with the electorate,” he wrote for the Sunday Times. “We are the Conservative party, not the Vote Leave party.” Nadine Dorries, a Eurosceptic MP and keen supporter of Boris Johnson’s leadership campaign, hit back at what she suggested was a concerted campaign against Johnson. “There has been a stop Boris campaign since the days of Michael Howard pushing forward Cameron and Osborne,” she tweeted. “Boris is a big winner. Many of those with their own eye on No 10 aren’t a fan of that prospect.” Duncan Smith said many in the party were deeply concerned about the most recent polling predicting a Labour lead of up to seven points and dire forecasts for the local and EU elections. “It was on the 29th when we didn’t leave; that’s when this has all gone wrong. Up until then, people were prepared to give Theresa May the benefit of the doubt,” he said. “The big problem was as soon as we didn’t leave, you could see all the poll ratings start to crash.”
Prime minister offers option of fresh vote if MPs pass withdrawal bill, which will be published ‘in next few days’     We’re closing this live blog down now. Thanks for reading and commenting. Here’s a summary of the latest events: If you’d like to read more, my colleagues Heather Stewart, Rowena Mason and Peter Walker have the full story: Updated  The Liberal Democrats have been holding a rally tonight. Addressing the audience, the party’s leader, Vince Cable, cited British Steel and Jaguar Land Rover – businesses he said were struggling at least in part because of Brexit – as examples of factors he believed had motivated people to turn towards his party and its pro-remain position. Cable added that the Brexit process was also harming the health service and attacked those who have advocated falling back on World Trade Organization rules, saying he was unsure exactly how many of them understand what that meant. He told supporters Lib Dem MEPs would provide a “solid block of liberal people who will stand firm against the rise of xenophobia, populism, sometimes outright racism and fascism that we’re now getting across Europe”. He closed by summarising the party’s plans for the final days of campaigning, including his planned debate with the Brexit party leader, Nigel Farage, whom he referred to as “Mr Trump’s little helper”. Updated  Lisa O'Carroll The Brexit Party leader, Nigel Farage, vowed to “kill off any chance of a second referendum”. More than 3,000 supporters filled the Olympia conference centre this evening, with speeches frequently punctuated with heckling. There were boos when Farage name-checked Jean-Claude Juncker, louder boos for Donald Tusk and louder still for Guy Verhofstadt. But the biggest boo was reserved for mention of a People’s Vote. Farage told the audience: If we win on Thursday, we kill off any chance of them forcing a second referendum on us because they know they would lose. Former Conservative supporters were easy to find.  Ian Gregory, a former Tory voter, said he was supporting Farage’s party because “the Tories were losing their space” in the electoral landscape. They struggle to keep up with the pace of change. Politics is changing and you have to adapt and they are just too slow. We are at an inflection point in history, maybe the same as the 1920s. Updated  Lisa O'Carroll Here’s a little more from Nigel Farage’s speech this evening: Nigel Farage"If win on Thursday, we ill kill off any chance of them forcing a second referendum on us, because they know they would lose." Farage unveils some policies - getting rid of House of Lords and Electoral Comm“We have got to get rid of the House of Lords, of Mr Blair and Mr Cameron’s cronies, oh, and the Electoral Commission, all of whom are remainers, all of whom are part of Westminster establishment”  Lisa O'Carroll Farage is addressing the audience now: Farage: “if we win on Thursday we will kill off any chance of them forcing a second referendum on us because they know they will lose” pic.twitter.com/wVcfp1NhQm  Lisa O'Carroll The former Czech Republic prime minister, Václav Klaus*, was one of three warm up acts at the Brexit Party’s last hustings, which is taking place in a packed Olympic conference centre in London. He told Nigel Farage’s supporters they had “many friends” in his country. You should give the rest of Europe a good example. Many Europeans need it, and many Europeans are waiting for it. Ann Widdecombe, the former Tory MP who is running for the Brexit Party in the South West constituency, earlier raised cheers and boos on cue in a pantomime-style question and answer warm-up by the former Conservative MP. Our game on Thursday is twofold: We have to send a message which will terrify Westminster; [to send a message] which they can only interpret in one way: That their future depends on Britain’s future being outside the EU. Her second message was: “We are not going away”. Widdecombe raised a loud boo when she name-checked Guy Verhofstadt, whose aides joked they had turned Britain into a “colony” in a recent Belgian documentary. He thinks we are a colony. Well, colonies have a disconcerting habit of revolting. *We originally reported here that the former Czech politician appearing tonight was Václav Havel. It was, in fact, Václav Klaus. Havel died in 2011. Updated  Nazia Parveen In Manchester, Anna Soubry tells remain supporters they can be proud of all the Change UK candidates and says it is absolutely imperative for campaigners to get out and canvass votes before Thursday. This is the beginning of the change that must happen in our country and change is coming. She is predicting that the main parties will go in to meltdown and urges the Conservatives to do the right thing, adding: Make no mistake that what is going to happen over the next few months ... is that Mrs May is going to go. God help us if Boris Johnson becomes prime minister ... he is on the threshold of Number 10. Now is the time for everyone to show courage and to put their country first ... One nation conservatives – you are better working with your neighbours ... which is the European Union. Updated  The Electoral Commission has carried out its visit to the Brexit Party’s office to conduct a review of the systems the party has in place to receive funds, it’s said. That was done as part of the commission’s “active oversight and regulation of these rules”, not as part of a formal investigation of the party. A spokeswoman has said the commission has not “seen evidence of electoral offences, but the law in this area is complex and we want to satisfy ourselves that the pParty’s systems are robust”. And she said the intervention of Gordon Brown had no bearing on the Electoral Commission’s work. Last week’s meeting with the Brexit Party was an opportunity to meet with representatives of this newly formed party. Today’s visit is about taking a closer look at the systems the party has in place to receive funds. It gives us active oversight of the rules and this includes helping those regulated to understand them and to ensure there are systems in place to comply with them. As a newly registered party running a national election campaign, who have put information into the public domain about the level of their fundraising, it is right and proper for the regulator to be in regular contact with the Brexit Party. We have been talking to the party since it registered, discussing the rules and the party’s systems. But, recently, we have seen significant public concern about the way the party raises funds. We have not seen evidence of electoral offences, but the law in this area is complex and we want to satisfy ourselves that the party’s systems are robust. Our regulatory work during this campaign – for the European Parliamentary elections – has not deviated from our usual approach. We are an independent and impartial organisation which is accountable to Parliament. We regulate as is proportionate to the issue, regardless of a party’s politics. Our decision to visit is not related to comments made by the former prime minister.  Chuka Umunna has begun to speak, revealing that many of his family members from continental Europe are still grieving over the EU referendum result. He calls for a People’s Vote to remain in the European Union. Brexit goes beyond politics, it is about who we are. This is about a lot more than politics or ideologies. It is about me personally, about my family ... about who we are as people. What I find so disgusting and reprehensible is the way that my community is dismissed as a liberal, metropolitan elite ... it is disgusting. Don’t call the people in my community some Waitrose-shopping, latte-drinking elite ... many people in my community live in poverty ... nobody has a monopoly on grievance. Loads of communities have been left behind ... the only difference is that we did not feel that leaving the European Union would change things. Urge everyone, if you want to stop this madness, [to] vote for Change UK on Thursday.  Another erstwhile supporter of May’s deal turns against her: With great reluctance I backed MV3. Now we are being asked to vote for a customs union and a second referendum. The Bill is directly against our manifesto - and I will not vote for it. We can and must do better - and deliver what the people voted for. It is maybe worth noting that Johnson is also on record as saying he hopes to replace May in Number 10.  Nazia Parveen At the Manchester rally, 57-year-old Andrew Graystone – whose expression of solidarity with his local Muslim community after the Christchurch attacks went viral – gets rapturous applause. There was a murmur of agreement across the room as he says the damage done by Brexit would take a generation to repair. He said: I am Manchester through and through. My son is a nurse and wife works with refugees. Six weeks ago, I woke up to the terrible news to the shootings and I thought about how my Muslim friends might feel and it made sense to walk to my local mosque in Levenshulme with a sign that said: ‘You are my friends, I will keep watch while you pray’. That photograph was shared millions of times, 50,000 personal messages – a torrent of goodwill and hopefulness ... overwhelmingly, British people want to live in peace with their neighbours and communities of co-operation. The vast majority of people want to build bridges and not walls; want a new kind of politics with a new leadership. Updated  There is yet more reaction coming in to May’s offer via various reporters in Westminster. And yet more of it constitutes bad news for the prime minister: One minister says May has achieved something - ‘how to take something bad and make it truly worse’ - another minister told me even before speech bill shouldn’t be tabled, more will make that point now Mark Francois says the Brexit New Deal is DOA: “The whole ERG is reuniting against this Bill, which is now effectively already dead on arrival across the bridge at St. Tommy’s.” ERG have just met and it was unanimous; the 40-odd who turned up said they would vote against it. Geoffrey Clifton-Brown also said he would vote against it (he’s voted for the deal every single time) > I can’t see how they bring this deal back  Nazia Parveen Anna Soubry and Chuka Umunna were delayed to the Manchester People’s Vote and Remain rally in the city’s Technology Centre due to train problems. Their supporters were buoyed as they waited though, by a ‘retro’ playlist that included the songs Let You Love Me, by Rita Ora, and Sweet But Psycho, by Ava Max. Mark Burrows and Nick Foss, both aged 58, carried placards as they accompanied Elisabeth Knight, who is standing for Change UK in the North West constituency. Burrows has been out campaigning and said people were ready to vote for a new party who would make a stand against Brexit. There is a lot of goodwill from remainers about Change UK because they see it as a force that can make things happen. It is an alternative that will make something radical happen. Dan Price, engineer and local councillor from Warrington who left the Labour party for the same reasons Chuka Umunna and some others did, has taken to the stand. Five weeks ago, I was a member of the Labour party. After years of Brexit fudge, I left the Labour party ... I could no longer look my constituents in the eye. I was inspired by the bravery of the Change UK candidates who sacrificed their careers and put their country first. I am a proud Northern, English, British and European. Brexiteers and Westminster have failed us. Updated  The former Brexit secretary, Dominic Raab, who has previously voted for May’s deal, has dismissed her latest plan. I listened carefully to the PM’s speech on the govt’s revised terms of Brexit. I cannot support legislation that would be the vehicle for a second referendum or Customs Union. Either option would frustrate rather than deliver Brexit - and break our clear manifesto promises. And it has gone down no better with senior figures in the hard Brexit-supporting ERG: At our regular ERG meeting, Geoffrey Clifton-Brown confirms he will now vote against the deal. There is no doubt the Prime Minister’s speech today has worsened the situation. The Prime Minister’s latest proposals are worse than before and would leave us bound deeply in to the EU. It is time to leave on WTO terms. Updated  The chancellor, Philip Hammond, is due to address the CBI’s annual dinner, which is due to start around now. It was reported earlier that he planned to say a no-deal Brexit would damage the economy. Now, shortly before he’s due to give the speech, a further extract emerges in which he drives home the point that fiscal imprudence is not a look that most Conservatives would like to be seen in. He plans to say: Fiscal responsibility is a proud boast of Conservative governments and I know that, in the coming months, my colleagues will want to protect that reputation – and so will resist the ever-present temptation to write cheques the country cannot afford. We must not undo a decade of hard work by the British people by making unfunded commitments that would send our national debt soaring; leave the economy vulnerable to future shocks; burden future generations and waste billions on interest payments. People must know they can trust Conservatives with the public finances. Earlier, we reported that he planned to attack the idea on the “populist right” that a no-deal Brexit was the only acceptable form of Brexit (see 9.23am). An extract revealed that he planned to say: On the populist right, there are those who now claim that the only outcome that counts as a truly legitimate Brexit is to leave with no deal. Let me remind them: the 2016 Leave campaign was clear that we would leave with a deal. So, to advocate for no deal is to hijack the result of the referendum and, in doing so, knowingly to inflict damage on our economy and our living standards. Because all the preparation in the world will not avoid the consequences of no deal. So I will continue to fight, in the face of this polarisation, for a negotiated Brexit; an outcome that respects the British people’s decision to leave, while recognising that there is no mandate for a “no-deal” exit; and that we have an absolute obligation to protect Britain’s jobs, businesses and future prosperity. But we need to be clear that, if we do not resolve this issue in the next few weeks, there is a real risk of a new prime minister abandoning the search for a deal, and shifting towards seeking a damaging no-deal exit as a matter of policy … in order to protect an ideological position which ignores the reality of Britain’s economic interests and the value of our Union.  Andrew Sparrow Sir Vince Cable, the Lib Dem leader, has put out this statement in response to Theresa May’s speech. He said: The prime minister’s last ditch attempt to get her withdrawal agreement through the Commons without a confirmatory referendum attached is doomed to failure. Her authority is draining away. Unless and until the government concedes that a people’s vote must be in the legislation, she will not win our support. That’s all from me for tonight. My colleague Kevin Rawlinson is taking over now.  There is a rule in journalism that, if someone frames a headline in the form of a question, it is normally best to assume the answer is no. But in this case, if you read Laura Kuenssberg’s blog, you will find that this is a rare example of a question mark being used to understate what an article is saying, not overstate it. Did the PM just make it worse? https://t.co/0z3bjVwDeM Here’s an extract. The diplomatic way of describing the situation tonight? Compromising when no one else is interested in consensus is impossible. The more brutal political interpretation - Theresa May’s mishandling of this whole situation has, over many, many months, pulled her deeper and deeper down into a quagmire of her own creation. An attempt at this stage to ask others for understanding to help her escape is just too late - far, far too late. Now some Conservative minds are turning to whether she can stay on to have this vote at all.  The People’s Vote campaign has dismissed Theresa May’s offer to let MPs have a vote on a second referendum. It has put this statement from the Labour MP Dame Margaret Beckett, who supports its campaign. She said: The prime minister’s last-ditch effort to force through her deal is no more likely to succeed than her previous attempts. Today she tried to spice up the same old deal with a series of supposedly new concessions, but then admitted she had no way of guaranteeing that she could deliver any of them. MPs will be rightly weary of offers from a Prime Minister who is about to resign and will probably be replaced by a hard-line successor. It would be very dangerous to vote through a deal to leave the European Union without any clear idea of our eventual destination – a blindfold Brexit that would only prolong uncertainty for families, businesses and parliament. And her effort to persuade MPs who support a people’s vote that they need to back her or lose the chance to give the public the final say, were contradicted by the prime minister herself when she said that failure to agree her deal could result in a new public vote and the possibility that the UK stayed in the EU. (See 4.27pm.) Rejecting this hotchpotch offer will show once and for all there is no stable majority for any form of Brexit without handing the decision back to the people.  Libby Brooks Nicola Sturgeon, Scotland’s first minister, may be tweeting this as an “amusing aside” ... The PM might not have guaranteed a second EU referendum, but her promise of a vote on one puts the Scottish Tories ‘vote for us for no more referendums on anything ever’ pitch on something of a sticky wicket. Just an amusing aside. But Theresa May’s offer of a vote on a second referendum does rather contradict Ruth Davidson’s election publicity, which has been loudly proclaiming that a vote for the Scottish Tories means “no more referendums”.  Less than 48 hours before the polls open, it can only add to Scottish Tory fears that Nigel Farage is about to halt their resurgence in Scotland.
Tories and Labour point to each other’s internal divisions after negotiations fail   The government and Labour have sought to blame each other after cross-party talks to find a compromise Brexit plan collapsed, leaving any remaining hopes of an imminent solution to the impasse in tatters. While both sides insisted the discussions had taken place in good faith, Theresa May said a sticking point had been Labour splits over a second referendum. Labour in turn said the government had been unwilling to compromise and that May’s imminent departure from Downing Street meant there was no guarantee any promises would be kept by a successor such as Boris Johnson. Nick Boles, the former Conservative MP who helped spearhead efforts to prevent a no-deal Brexit in March, said he now feared such a departure was almost inevitable when the EU27’s latest deadline of 31 October is reached. “It’s game over,” he said. “We only won by one, and it’s very unclear that we would have the same level of Tory support, and for that matter Labour support. We are absolutely convinced that parliament will not find a way to stop no-deal Brexit.” The conclusion to six weeks of intermittent talks, which had angered many Conservative and Labour MPs who feared the nature of the compromise that might result, came with the release of a letter from Jeremy Corbyn to May on Friday. Despite praising the talks as constructive, the Labour leader wrote: “It has become clear that, while there are some areas where compromise has been possible, we have been unable to bridge important policy gaps between us. “Even more crucially, the increasing weakness and instability of your government means there cannot be confidence in securing whatever might be agreed between us.” May’s spokesman said the view was mutual: “It was clear to the government … that the talks were not going to reach a successful conclusion.” Corbyn’s letter cited examples of what he said was May’s inability to carry her government on possible compromises, for example ministerial dissent over a possible customs union and the idea of allowing reduced food standards to secure a US trade deal. Speaking in Bristol at a campaign event for next week’s European elections, the prime minister said the negotiations had “made progress”, but blamed Labour for the lack of an outcome. I have written to Theresa May to say that talks on finding a compromise agreement for leaving the European Union have gone as far as they can.The government's growing weakness and instability means there cannot be confidence in its ability to deliver. pic.twitter.com/H27qxDleaB “In particular, we haven’t been able to overcome the fact that there isn’t a common position in Labour about whether they want to deliver Brexit or have a second referendum and try to reverse it,” she said. A Downing Street source said Sir Keir Starmer’s strong support for a second referendum was a particular sticking point. “It is clear that the shadow Brexit secretary has fairly strident views on the issue, and he led the Labour team in the negotiations,” the source said. Starmer told the Guardian earlier this week that he believed it would be impossible for any deal to pass without a confirmatory referendum attached. The Brexit secretary, Steve Barclay, echoed the point during a visit to Northern Ireland, saying the talks collapsed because of “division in the Labour party over the second referendum”. In a sign of what is likely to be a fierce debate within government in the wake of the collapse, Barclay insisted it would be possible to “mitigate the disruption” of a no-deal Brexit. Labour hit back at this narrative, with Starmer saying May was “trying to blame everyone but herself” for the collapse of the talks. He tweeted: “She knows the reality is she couldn’t carry her own side or offer a realistic compromise. Any deal agreed wouldn’t last a day under a new Tory leader.” The tortuous process of discussion, which saw occasional meetings between May and Corbyn and many more involving their frontbench teams and officials, had been widely predicted to come to an end, but the news was still enough to see the pound drop to its lowest level against the dollar since February. Corbyn had come under mounting pressure from within the shadow cabinet to walk away from the talks, including from close allies who feared a stitch-up that would see Labour blamed as the facilitator of a “Tory Brexit”. Both sides stressed that some progress had been made, with the prime minister’s chief Brexit negotiator, Ollie Robbins, in Brussels earlier this week to discuss a joint draft of proposed changes to the political declaration about Britain’s future relationship with the EU27. But while there were signs the two leaders were not miles apart, a number of Conservative MPs were agitated at the idea of a possible customs union, Corbyn’s key demand, while many in Labour disliked the prospect of a plan not being endorsed by a second referendum. The government intends to press ahead with holding a vote on the withdrawal agreement bill in the week beginning 3 June – but sources stressed it would include “new features that reflect some of the discussions”, in the hope of winning over Labour MPs. May also plans to resume talks with the Democratic Unionist party, with which she is in a confidence and supply partnership, about how it could be reassured that accepting the deal would not undermine the integrity of the UK. Government sources also pointed to progress on considering “alternative arrangements” for the Northern Irish border – one of the central concerns of Brexiters who have held out against the deal. Corbyn said Labour would “carefully consider” any new proposals, but added: “I should reiterate that, without significant changes, we will continue to oppose the government’s deal as we do not believe it safeguards jobs, living standards and manufacturing industry in Britain.”
Politicians from across the House shoot down repackaged offer in major blow to PM   Theresa May’s final attempt to patch together a parliamentary majority for Brexit appears to have backfired after her 10-point “new deal” was rejected by MPs from across the political spectrum. In a speech at the headquarters of consultancy PricewaterhouseCoopers in London on Tuesday, the prime minister laid out a series of promises that will be included in the 100-page withdrawal agreement bill (Wab) when it is published later this week – including an offer of a binding vote on a referendum if the deal passes. But, after a stormy cabinet meeting in which a more generous proposed offer on a second referendum was met with the threat of revolt, MPs on both sides of the Brexit divide said that the proposals were hollow. Within hours, more than 20 Conservatives who backed the deal last time rejected it. May had implored MPs in her own party and beyond to take a fresh look at what she called a “serious offer”. And with her party facing defeat by Nigel Farage’s Brexit party in Thursday’s European election, she warned that extending the Brexit deadlock “risks opening the door to a nightmare future of permanently polarised politics”. “Look around the world and consider the health of liberal democratic politics, and look across the United Kingdom and consider the impact of failing to deliver on the clear instruction of the British people in a lawful referendum,” she said. May sought to woo remainers by promising that if MPs support the deal at its second reading in early June, she will offer them a vote on a referendum as the legislation passes through parliament – and be bound by the result. “I do not believe this is a route that we should take, because I think we should be implementing the result of the first referendum, not asking the British people to vote in a second one,’ she said. “But I recognise the genuine and sincere strength of feeling across the House on this important issue.” 1 The government will seek to conclude alternative arrangements to replace the backstop by December 2020. 2 Should the backstop come into force, the government will ensure that Great Britain will stay aligned with Northern Ireland. 3 The negotiating objectives and final treaties for our future relationship with the EU will have to be approved by MPs. 4 A new workers’ rights bill that guarantees workers’ rights will be no less favourable than in the EU. 5 No change in the level of environmental protection. 6 The UK will seek as close to frictionless trade in goods with the EU as possible while outside the single market and ending free movement. 7 We will keep up to date with EU rules for goods and agri-food products that are relevant to checks at border protecting the thousands of jobs that depend on just-in-time supply chains. 8 The government will bring forward a customs compromise for MPs to decide on to break the deadlock. 9 There will be a vote for MPs on whether the deal should be subject to a referendum. 10 There will be a legal duty to secure changes to the political declaration to reflect this new deal. MPs would also be given the opportunity to vote on alternative customs proposals, including the compromise offer May made to Labour during the ill-fated six-week negotiations of a temporary customs union on goods. If Labour won the next general election, they could upgrade it to a permanent arrangement. May also made a series of other pledges, including a separate bill to ensure workers’ rights do not fall behind EU levels; a guarantee that there will be, “no change in the level of environmental protection when we leave the EU”; and a promise that parliament will be consulted on the next stage of Brexit negotiations. MPs across the House of Commons were unpersuaded by May’s new proposals. By Tuesday evening not a single MP who opposed the deal last time had come out to support it. Labour leader Jeremy Corbyn said: “We won’t back a repackaged version of the same old deal – and it’s clear that this weak and disintegrating government is unable deliver on its own commitments.” The referendum pledge sparked a backlash almost immediately, with several Tories who have supported her in the past, including Harlow MP Robert Halfon, saying they could not back a bill that appeared to open the door to reversing the 2016 vote. “If Theresa May is now supporting a second referendum, it makes it very hard for me to support the latest Wab when it comes to the House of Commons,” he said. “This is a betrayal of the 2016 referendum and a betrayal of everything she has been saying since she became prime minister.” He was one of at least 20 Conservative MPs who supported her deal in March, who said they could not back the new package – putting her on course for an even heavier defeat than the 58 majority that defeated her deal at the last attempt. Members of the backbench European Research Group, some of whom switched sides to support the prime minister in March, were united in opposition. “Theresa May has done a tremendous job of healing the wounds and reuniting Tory MPs split on Brexit,” said a ERG source. The Democratic Unionist party also dismissed the concessions as a “hodge podge”. Supporters of a people’s vote meanwhile argued that the mere promise of a vote on a referendum, which Downing Street declined to say how it would whip, would not be enough to secure their support. Peter Kyle, the Labour MP who was one of the architects of the Kyle-Wilson amendment calling for a confirmatory referendum, said: “The PM owns this mess, not MPs like me that have tried to offer ways out. If she attaches a confirmatory ballot to the bill I will support it. What she has offered falls way short. “I won’t vote for something affecting future generations simply to get through a difficult week.” Nicola Sturgeon, who has been a vocal advocate for a second referendum, said her 35 Scottish Nationalist party MPs would not support the legislation either. “Theresa May said that MPs who vote against the bill will be voting to stop Brexit. That is exactly what SNP MPs will do because Scotland did not vote for Brexit.” May was willing to make a more generous offer to referendum campaigners, but failed to win the backing of her cabinet in a confrontational three-hour meeting on Tuesday morning, several cabinet sources said. They described how May’s authority had completely ebbed away at the meeting, where pro-Brexit ministers were in revolt over the idea that she was prepared to put a second referendum and customs union on the face of the withdrawal bill. This would have put them forward for a vote as government amendments, which one cabinet source said was an idea branded “completely unacceptable” by Chris Grayling, Andrea Leadsom and Geoffrey Cox. The cabinet also rejected the idea of a free vote on the second referendum. One cabinet source from soft Brexit wing of the party said: “It felt like Grayling was the only one on the verge of resignation but it was complete pushback from the cabinet. There was a whole row over what is called the face of the bill. “Basically if you put something on the face of a bill it is automatically accepted as an amendment adopted into the bill – five things were proposed to go on the face of the bill and all of them were talked down, including the second referendum and customs union. If she’d put it on the face of the bill, it would have been part of the legislation and therefore put forward by the government. The PM wanted to compromise a lot more and was just unable to.”
Supporters look to Nigel Farage to unite nation and introduce ‘down-to-earth’ politics, says our Paris correspondent   As the glitterball twinkled and the raffle table heaved with prizes in a Lancashire pub in the former mill village of Bamber Bridge, Margaret West was feeling happier than she had for months. The Blackpool rock‘n’roll dancer and former education worker had been so angry and stressed over Brexit she’d lost sleep over it, felt ignored by politicians and unfairly insulted online for voting to leave. But then something came along that made her feel represented, “that gave me a sense of excitement, something new and worthy like the Suffragette movement”, she said. It was Nigel Farage’s Brexit party. West had never been involved in politics and had voted Labour before switching to Conservative. Now she is one of more than 100,000 Brexit party supporters who donated online, put stickers in their windows and went to Farage’s roadshow rallies. At this Brexit party pub night south of Preston, supporters were looking ahead to planning a Westminster election campaign. “It’s like being swept up on a tide,” West said. “There’s such a great atmosphere. I’ve never been to the football but when Nigel walks out at a rally, I imagine that’s the feeling you get when your team scores a goal.” In the north-west, where cities such as Manchester and Liverpool voted remain in the EU referendum but a swathe of former mill towns in Lancashire voted leave, the European election campaign showed how Britain has a level of disillusionment with the political system greater than disaffection in almost all other EU countries. Viewed from abroad, there has been growing interest at the Brexit party’s well-run European election campaign, because until recently Britain had been seen as an exception to the rise in parties styled on a model of the people v the corrupt elite. From countries such as France and Italy, where populism has steadily grown for years, Britain was seen as standing apart – “a place of pragmatism”, as one French centrist put it – where people respected political institutions and the traditional party system. The Brexit crisis has appeared to blow that trust apart. A few miles away in Preston, far-right activist Tommy Robinson, whose real name is Stephen Yaxley-Lennon, was addressing hundreds at his biggest street rally of the campaign. In far-right European politics, there has always been an interest in the potential in the UK for more radical, nationalist politics. Jean-Marie Le Pen, the former leader of the French far-right, flew to Cheshire 15 years ago to support the British National party leader, Nick Griffin’s, European parliament campaign. Eggs and bins were hurled at Le Pen’s car and he complained: “I don’t see why I shouldn’t be able to walk about freely in England.” But at the Brexit party’s pub meeting, it was the professionalism of local party organisation and the slick online campaign that stood out. One party activist near Blackpool who had previously worked for Ukip, said the Brexit party had learned from Italy’s Five Star Movement. “Why try to reinvent the wheel?” the activist said. With its model of online activism, the Italian movement had quickly leapt from populist protest group to government coalition partner. Farage, the former Ukip leader, has notably set up his new party like a business, ensuring tight control without the internal wrangling that has made traditional parties seem ungovernable during the Brexit crisis. Campaigners said the party deliberately pushed an optimistic message during the European election campaign. It talked about protecting democracy and the Brexit referendum result. There was little talk of immigration and more focus on disgust at Westminster than the EU, deliberately appealing across old left-right divides. Claire Fox, the longtime Revolutionary Communist party activist who led the Brexit party campaign in the north-west, sipped her pint and addressed her pub audience: “Politics has come alive!” she said, likening the party to Manchester’s pro-democracy Peterloo massacre. “Let’s get organised and launch a new kind of down-to-earth politics!” As for the “racism stuff”, opponents were levelling at the party, Fox said: “One third of ethnic minorities voted leave. The idea of calling us bigots – how dare they?” Many in the room said they felt under attack in a polarised political landscape. One man with a bandage on his finger said he had been “bitten by a remainer dog” while leafleting. The milkshake-throwing of this British campaign had taken on more importance than food-throwing does elsewhere in the EU. The centrist Emmanuel Macron has been egged, other French politicians hit with flour, cream-pies and ketchup and Italian figures are regularly hit by eggs and tomatoes. Nadine Mason, a student nurse who wants to run for Westminster for the Brexit party, said there was bullying. “Every single person in this room has had someone calling them racist, Nazi, bigoted, or that they hadn’t known what they voted for when they chose to leave the EU,” she said. “Women died for us to have the right to vote – us working-class people – but now we’re being told that we’re not bright enough to vote.” Kerry Bamber, a jeweller and former council worker, described herself as “your average keyboard warrior” who stood for Ukip in local elections, then moved to the Brexit party. She said: “I grew up on a dairy farm in Lancashire. When European milk quotas came in, I remember sitting on a five-bar gate, swinging my legs, and seeing my granddad’s tears. I did a lot of research before voting leave … There is going to be a smack in the face for the political elite. They are misjudging the mood of the country and I can’t understand why they are so detached from the average person on the street.” French geographer Christophe Guilluy has likened Brexit supporters to France’s yellow vest anti-government movement – a disaffection with the political class that is likely to last. He said political powers in the UK would not be able to address Britain’s political crisis if they haughtily dismissed leave voters as “xenophobic old people from Yorkshire”. Karine Tournier-Sol, a politics lecturer at France’s Toulon University, who wrote the only French book on Ukip, said Farage’s “anti-European and anti-establishment discourse” led to him being likened to Marine Le Pen, the French far-right leader and daughter of Jean-Marie. Both “castigated traditional parties” for not representing the people, while claiming to represent the people themselves. However, she said there were key differences such as the economy and the fact that Le Pen no longer says France must leave the EU. She considered Farage’s rise as a unique brand of “English anti-European nationalism” and said “there is no real equivalent of Nigel Farage in France.” Meanwhile, in central Manchester, some remain voters felt the EU elections had shown how Brexit broke party loyalties, leaving a sense of political rootlessness. At the finish line of Manchester’s half-marathon, the north-west candidates for the new pro-EU party, Change UK, stressed that they were political newcomers: Arun Banerji, a junior intensive care doctor at Preston hospital, who signed up for the campaign after a night-shift in A&E with European nurses, and Andrea Cooper, a Liverpool charity executive working with young people in one of Britain’s most deprived areas. Voters stopped for heated discussions, which were less about the branding failures or logo disasters of a party set up when eight Labour and three Conservative MPs left their parties during the Brexit crisis, and more about whether a new centrist party might be built. “I don’t need much persuading, I’m politically homeless,” said Ian Carnegie, 65, a pro-remain Labour voter from Yorkshire. David Shimwell, a businessman and former Conservative, campaigning for Change UK with his two poodles, said: “Disaffection with politicians started with the MPs’ expenses scandal. Politicians have had a bunker mentality ever since. That allows Farage to say the system is broken and how corrupt they are. Politicians have to get out of the bunker and sell politics back to the people.” Some have wondered whether Macron’s centrist party in France could offer lessons. Change UK candidates have echoed Macron’s initial message of offering “hope” and “listening”. But Macron’s party was built around a charismatic leader, in the same way the Brexit party revolves around Farage. The key – Macron insiders say – was to disrupt politics, make everything seem different: name, logo, rhetoric and message. Natasha Correia, 23, who worked for the NHS, said: “Being a British-born person of colour after the Brexit vote, you could feel a kind of tension, people asking you where you were from. It was quite upsetting.” Describing herself as conflicted over party politics, she said she liked Change UK because it was something new. Andrew Graystone, who worked in community relations in Manchester before standing for Change UK, said: “There’s a fault line running down the middle of Britain and Brexit exposed it. It’s about who owns the right to see themselves as British: people asking themselves: is this a country for all sorts, or just for people like me?” Graystone said many emotions were at play. “Both Nigel Farage and Tommy Robinson had fathers who left them when they were young. Both of them are in some ways desperately looking for attention. I’d love to sit with them to talk about that.” He said there was a space for building what he called new, inclusive politics. “It’s a slow business building bridges. Tearing them down is very quick.” • This article was amended on 24 May 2019. An earlier version misnamed the Revolutionary Communist party as the Communist Revolutionary party.
Brexit party humiliates Conservatives while remain voters desert Labour for Lib Dems   An insurgent Brexit party and reinvigorated Liberal Democrats have delivered a harrowing night for the Conservatives and Labour at the European elections, prompting profound soul-searching at the top of both major parties. Nigel Farage’s Brexit party humiliated the Conservatives in their rural heartlands but also made sweeping gains in cities such as Cardiff, Leeds and Sheffield, as well as in Hillingdon, the home of Boris Johnson’s seat, where the Tories were pushed into fourth. Farage’s success campaigning in favour of a no-deal Brexit is likely to push the Conservative leadership candidates into hardline positions on leaving the EU. Theresa May said the European elections were a “very disappointing night” for the Tories, adding: “It shows the importance of finding a Brexit deal, and I sincerely hope these results focus minds in parliament.” Jeremy Hunt, the foreign secretary, warned that the Conservatives were facing an “existential threat”, while Johnson said it was a “crushing rebuke” to the government’s failure to take the UK out of the EU. The night also confirmed an extraordinary revival of the Lib Dems, who overtook the Tories in Theresa May’s Maidenhead seat and came first in Jeremy Corbyn’s north London home of Islington. Overnight, the Brexit party gained 28 seats, with the Lib Dems in second on 15 seats. Labour held 10, having lost seven so far, the Green party won seven, a gain of four, and the Tories were languishing in fifth place, with just three seats. The results so far show that the hard Brexit vote totalled 36.8% – with the Brexit party on 33.3% and Ukip on 3.5%. The overall total for pro-leave parties was up at 45.6% including the Conservatives on a historically low 8.8%. The pro-remain vote added up to 41.5% – with the Lib Dems on 20.9%, the Greens on 12.5%, the SNP on 3.5%, Change UK on 3.6% and Plaid Cymru on 1%. Labour, which tried to appeal to both sides with a soft Brexit pitch or a possible confirmatory referendum, was on 14.6%. The punishing result for Labour is likely to prompt Corbyn’s critics to question again the Brexit strategy he and his advisers have pursued, with recriminations likely to spill into the open in the coming days. The shadow foreign secretary, Emily Thornberry, said Labour must radically readdress its Brexit policy and campaign for a second referendum, and shortly afterwards Corbyn vowed the party would reflect on the results. The Labour leader said: “After three years of Tory failure to deliver a Brexit that works for the whole country, these elections became a proxy second referendum. Over the coming days we will have conversations across our party and movement, and reflect on these results on both sides of the Brexit divide.” A triumphant Farage, re-elected to the European parliament in the south-east, said his party had achieved a historic result. The Brexit party won all of the regions in England, apart from London, as well as Wales, and took almost 2 million more votes than their closest rivals, the Lib Dems. “Never before in British politics has a new party launched just six weeks ago topped the polls in a national election,” Farage said. “There’s a huge message here, massive message here. The Labour and Conservative parties could learn a big lesson from tonight, though I don’t suppose that they actually will.” Among those elected to the European parliament for the Brexit party were the former Conservative MP Ann Widdecombe and Annunziata Rees-Mogg, the sister of the Tory hard Brexiter Jacob Rees-Mogg. The Brexit party chair Richard Tice, who won a seat in the east of England, echoed Farage’s demand that his party be included in any forthcoming Brexit negotiations with the EU. He said voters were “sending a clear message back to Westminster that we want a WTO [World Trade Organization] Brexit”. “What’s so important now is we come in and help the government quickly because it is in paralysis and is navel-gazing about who should be the next leader,” he said. Among the Tory casualties was the party’s European parliament leader Ashley Fox. The prominent Tory Brexiter MEP Daniel Hannan, one of the key figures in Vote Leave, was narrowly re-elected but said he was concerned the Brexit party could take seats from the Conservatives in a general election. In Hannan’s south-east region, the Brexit party came top in 27 of 31 areas, with three won by the Lib Dems and one by the Greens. Labour and the Conservatives failed to win a single area. Hannan said it was “the worst result my party has suffered in its 185-year history” but that he could see why the party had taken a pummelling. “It’s been a very bad night and in way understandably; you don’t need to be any kind of expert on politics – people voted leave and we haven’t left,” he told Sky News. At the opposite end of the Brexit divide, the Liberal Democrats dominated in London at the expense of Labour, winning areas such as Camden and Lambeth by almost 10,000 more votes than Labour, despite five-figure Labour majorities in most of those parliamentary seats. Vince Cable’s party took three seats in the capital, with two each for Labour and the Brexit party and another for the Greens. Cable said voters had backed its “clear, honest, unambiguous message” and delivered the party’s best European elections result, which means they have more MEPs than MPs in the Commons. “There is a clear lesson for Labour in tonight’s results: get off the fence. In trying to please everybody they have pleased nobody,” Cable said.  Alastair Campbell, Tony Blair’s former press secretary, said he had voted Liberal Democrat. “I didn’t vote Labour for the first time in my life and it was a very, very strange feeling,” he told the BBC. Thornberry was the first senior shadow cabinet minister to call for a radical overhaul of Labour’s Brexit policy. “We went into an election where the most important issue was what was our view on leaving the EU, and we were not clear about it,” she said. “We were not clear on the one single thing that people wanted to hear. “We should have said quite simply that any deal that comes out of this government should be put to a confirmatory referendum, and that remain should be on the ballot paper, and that Labour would campaign to remain. I think that we will after these elections need to look very carefully at why it is that we got this result.” Recriminations also came from the trade unions. The TSSA general secretary, Manuel Cortes, said the party should adopt a policy on Europe that was more in tune with its pro-European members. “I have knocked on many doors during the campaign and it’s blindingly obvious that our clear-as-mud line on Brexit hurt us deeply,” he said. Any handbrake turn on Labour’s Brexit policy is likely to meet with resistance in the shadow cabinet. The shadow Cabinet Office minister, Jon Trickett, a close ally of Corbyn, pointed to results in Labour areas where the Brexit party had gained votes, including his own seat. “Those ‘important people’ who said Wakefield is now for remain need to show some humility; they were wrong,” he said, a veiled dig at his pro-remain neighbouring MP Mary Creagh. “I never doubted my constituents’ determination to have their voice heard and that is why I have stuck to my view to accept the original referendum.” In Wales, Plaid Cymru took the lion’s share of the pro-remain vote but the Brexit party topped the poll, snatching a seat from the Conservatives and one from Ukip. In Scotland, the Scottish National party won three of the six seats available, its best European result yet, with Labour failing to win a single seat after enduring its worst Scottish election since 1910. The Lib Dems won back a seat it had lost in 2014, and the Tories narrowly succeeded in holding onto its sole Scottish seat, with the Brexit party supplanting Ukip, coming in second overall. The night also saw a significant boost for the Green party, a pattern seen across Europe. Molly Scott-Cato, the Green MEP re-elected in the south-west, said it was a “thrilling night” for greens across EU member states. The results seemed to confirm the disintegration of Ukip, which lost all its seats, including that of its leader, Gerard Batten, in London. Change UK, the nascent remain party led by a breakaway group of Labour and Tory MPs, failed to make any breakthrough. The far-right independent candidate Tommy Robinson was roundly defeated in the north-west, claiming he had faced a “near impossible task”. Robinson, whose real name is Stephen Yaxley-Lennon, was repeatedly targeted by protesters, including two who threw milkshakes over him.
April manufacturing fell 44.5% as factories shut down for an EU exit that never came   Car production plunged by nearly half in April as factories shut down to prepare for a Brexit date that never came, prompting renewed anguish from the UK motor industry at the “untold damage” done by prolonged uncertainty. In a slump that the Society of Motor Manufacturers and Traders (SMMT) described as “extraordinary”, 70,971 vehicles rolled off the production lines in April, down 44.5% from 127,970 in the same month of last year. Labour said the figures showed that the government’s “mishandling” of Brexit was already hurting carmakers, warning of further pain if the next Tory leader backs leaving the EU without a deal. The majority of the decline in production was down to large automotive firms such as Jaguar Land Rover, BMW and Peugeot bringing forward annual maintenance stoppages that usually take place in the summer. By moving the date of the planned shutdowns, they hoped to ensure that any disruption to their supply lines around 29 March – the original date of Brexit – took place while production lines were already idling, minimising the impact. However, the postponement of the UK’s exit from the EU means that the stoppages, which the SMMT called “costly”, proved to be needless. The shutdowns cannot be repeated over the new Brexit date of 31 October, meaning car firms will have to bear any slowdown to their vital “just-in-time” manufacturing processes during a period of full-scale output. The SMMT chief executive, Mike Hawes, said: “Today’s figures are evidence of the vast cost and upheaval Brexit uncertainty has already wrought on UK automotive manufacturing businesses and workers. “This is why no deal must be taken off the table immediately and permanently, so industry can get back to the business of delivering for the economy and keeping the UK at the forefront of the global technology race.” April’s fall in vehicle production is the 11th straight monthly decline, with previous falls put down to sluggish demand in international markets including the EU, US and China. However, the 44.5% slump in April was much steeper than the 15% seen in February and the 13% reported in March, with the SMMT blaming Brexit contingency plans. “The shift in shutdown, which cannot be repeated for a 31 October deadline, was part of a raft of costly and ongoing contingency measures, including stockpiling, rationalisation, training for new customs procedures and rerouting of logistics,” the SMMT said. It said these measures were “all designed to try to protect business when the UK leaves the customs union and single market”. Rebecca Long-Bailey, Labour’s shadow business minister, said: “These alarming figures, which show output halving, are stark warnings of what could come from a hard-right Tory leader crashing the UK out of Europe with no deal. “The industry needs certainty and the government must work with trade unions to produce a long-term strategy for the sector.” The SMMT said that if the UK leaves the EU with a favourable deal and a “substantial” transition period, the decline in production would ease off by the end of the year as new models come on stream. “A no-deal Brexit, however, could exacerbate this decline, with the threat of border delays, production stoppages and additional costs compromising competitiveness.” The SMMT’s figures show that for the year to date, car production in the UK is down 22.4% to 441,260, with exports hit hardest – down 23.3% compared to an 18.5% fall in production for the domestic market. The automotive industry has been on the frontline of anxiety about the effect of Brexit on business, with warnings issued by a host of firms about the dangers of a no-deal scenario in particular. An Oxford University study released in April predicted that the UK car industry could collapse by almost half by the mid-2020s in a no-deal Brexit scenario, with plant closures triggering thousands of job losses across the country.
Prime minister to give details of plan to get withdrawal agreement bill ‘over the line’   Theresa May is to set out the details of her “new deal” on Brexit in a speech at 4pm as she paves the way for a last-ditch attempt to take Britain out of the EU before she leaves Downing Street. The prime minister’s spokesman said cabinet had discussed, “alternative arrangements, workers’ rights, environmental protections, and further assurances on protecting the integrity of the UK in the unlikely event that the backstop is required”. However, much of the focus will be on whether the government has moved far enough on customs arrangements and the prospect of a second Brexit referendum to win over Labour MPs. May told her cabinet colleagues on Tuesday: “The withdrawal agreement bill [Wab] is the vehicle which gets the UK out of the EU and it is vital to find a way to get it over the line.” The discussion lasted more than two hours, against the backdrop of clashing comments from the chancellor, Philip Hammond, and the leader of the House of Commons, Andrea Leadsom, about the prospect of a no-deal Brexit. Asked about Hammond’s speech, in which he is expected to say that a no-deal Brexit would be a betrayal, May’s spokesman said that option remained a “plausible” outcome and preparations for it would continue. Leadsom suggested earlier on Tuesday she would be unwilling to sign off significant concessions on a customs union. “I have been very clear for years: leaving the EU means leaving the single market, leaving the customs union, taking back control of our money, border and laws.” Asked whether there had been disagreement during the lengthy discussion, the spokesman said: “Brexit is an issue which evokes strong opinions. These are very often reflected around the cabinet table.” The cabinet also discussed the plans for Donald Trump’s forthcoming visit. The president is due to take part in D-day commemorations, which fall in the same week of early June when May has promised to offer MPs another vote on Brexit. MPs have already rejected May’s deal three times, but Downing Street is determined to frame the second reading of the Wab as a vote on a “new deal”. It has been drawn up after six weeks of cross-party talks with Jeremy Corbyn, which failed to result in a deal that Labour could whip its MPs to support. Many of the elements that emerged from those talks, and from the government’s previous efforts to tempt both Labour and Brexit-supporting Tories to support the deal, are likely to be incorporated into the legislation. Tabling it is likely to be one of May’s final acts as prime minister. If she wins the vote, she is likely to remain in office to see the legislation through all its parliamentary stages – something Downing Street hopes can be completed before MPs’ summer recess. But if the bill falls, May has promised to meet the executive of the 1922 Committee of backbench Tory MPs, and would then be expected to set out a timetable for her departure. A crowded field of potential successors, including several in the cabinet, have already set out their positions on a range of issues in preparation for a summer campaign. His style is notably technocratic, with few rhetorical flourishes and an emphasis on his consensual approach and long record as a minister, notably during more than five years as health secretary, a traditional graveyard of ministerial careers. Hunt’s attempts to talk up a backstory as an 'underestimated' entrepreneur can fall flat given he is also the son of an admiral and was head boy at Charterhouse. Overall, Hunt’s approach can seem uninspiring and hard to pin down in terms of core beliefs, hence the 'Theresa in trousers' nickname among some Tory MPs – one that is more catchy than accurate (since May herself often wears trousers). In the final round of MP voting Hunt edged out Michael Gove, 77 votes to 75. Johnson’s progress to Downing Street appeared unstoppable even before an overwhelming victory in the first round of voting among MPs. Most of his colleagues believe it is now all but inevitable that he will be Britain’s next prime minister. His well-disciplined campaign team will continue with their strategy of subjecting him to minimal media exposure, though once the field is narrowed down to two, the final pair will appear in more than a dozen head-to-head hustings for Tory members. The team’s main aim is simply to keep heads down and avoid Johnson creating headlines for the wrong reasons. It may not have worked.  Johnson came first in the final round of MP voting with 160 votes. Labour had feared any deal it signed up to could be torn up by May’s successor, who is expected to come from the right wing of the party. May is likely to urge Labour MPs to seize the opportunity to legislate to give parliament a say over future trade negotiations, rather than leave the way clear for a new prime minister to leave the EU without a deal by default. Downing Street signalled that the Wab was likely to include the Snell-Nandy amendment: a plan drawn up by the Labour MPs Gareth Snell and Lisa Nandy to ensure parliament is consulted on the next phase of negotiations. However, May promised to accept it before the third meaningful vote, and neither Snell nor Nandy supported the government.
Both sides of Brexit divide have claimed victory, but the truth is far from conclusive   The European election results have left those on all sides of the Brexit divide claiming victory. Here we analyse the results and what they mean for leave and remain. Nigel Farage’s Brexit party may have triumphed in the European election by a significant margin, but there is enough data for remain supporters to argue that their side was victorious on the night – and that they could win any second referendum. There are several ways to make plausible comparisons. The simplest is to compare the Brexit party’s 5.2m votes across the UK with the “Bollocks to Brexit” Lib Dems and the pro-remain Greens, who attracted 3.4m and 2m. Taken together, they come out 142,000 votes higher at 5.4m. A second method is to take all the pro-Brexit parties – Farage’s party, Ukip and the DUP – and compare that against the pro-remain parties, taking in Change UK and Scottish, Welsh and Irish nationalists. That gives you 5.9 million voting unambiguously pro-Brexit and 6.8 million voting for remain parties, including 884,000 from the SNP, Plaid, Sinn Fein and the Alliance Party in Northern Ireland. The merit of the first two approaches is that neither tries to take into account the dwindling numbers of Conservative and Labour voters, where it can be argued that both parties retain some support across the Brexit divide. But even so, remain comes out ahead. Various pollsters have come up with their own formula for how to account for those who stubbornly stuck to the traditional two main parties. Over the weekend Deborah Mattinson of Britain Thinks suggested Tory voters were 80%  pro-leave and that a majority of Labour voters – 60% – supported remain. That yields 2.1 million more for leave composed of 1.2 million Conservatives and 938,000 Labour voters and 1.7 million more for remain made up from 302,000 Tories and 1.4 million for Jeremy Corbyn’s party. Applying that to the totals so far would produce 8.1m votes for leave and 8.7m to remain. Or to put that another way: 47% for leave and a fraction over 50% for remain (the exclusion of minor parties with less than 100,000 votes nationwide is why the figures don’t add up to 100%): a narrow remain win by 586,000 votes. There are several reasons to be cautious, however, not least because making any assumptions about Conservative and Labour votes is contestable. The margin of the Brexit party’s victory was significant, particularly when considered in terms of the share of the vote – its 31.6% was well ahead of the second-placed Lib Dems’ 20.3%. That would mean the party would have done disproportionately well if it was a Westminster election. Its share of MEPs, which are elected on a regional list system, was also disproportionately higher – the party won 29 out of 73 available, or 40%. Glance at the electoral map, which shows results as they are counted, council by council, and the Brexit party is dominant in England and Wales, outside London and the major cities of the south, Midlands and north-west. In the North East, Yorkshire and East of England constituencies, the party was dominant, winning in Newcastle, Sunderland, Hull, Leeds, Bradford and Sheffield. Just over a third of Britons – 36.9% – voted last Thursday, an improvement of just 1.5 percentage points on the 2014 election. The total of votes cast including Northern Ireland first preferences was 17.2m – less than the 17.4 million who voted to leave in the 2016 referendum, where turnout was 72.2%. Those explicitly hoping to seek a Brexit compromise – the Conservatives – and those hoping to straddle the arguments – Labour – were emphatically knocked back. The Conservatives’ 9.1% share was the worst it had achieved in any national poll in its history. Labour, in particular, lost share in pro-Brexit areas such as the North East (17 points) and in pro-remain London (13 points). Underlining the scale of the disappointment, the party was fourth in Sheffield, as well as second in Newcastle and Leeds to the Brexit party. In the south, Labour came fourth in Bristol, Norwich, Brighton and Hove – where the Greens won, the Lib Dems were second and the Brexit party third. From the moment it became clear that a European election was inevitable, it was obvious the defining issue would be people’s attitudes to the Brexit crisis. The results showed that for leavers the answer was simple: to support the most famous pro-Brexit name on the ballot paper, Nigel Farage. By contrast, votes for pro-remain parties were split and the cause clearly lacked a figurehead.
Opinium poll on European election voting intentions suggests surge of support for Nigel Farage’s party   Nigel Farage’s Brexit party is on course to secure more support at the European elections than the Tories and Labour combined, according to the latest Opinium poll for the Observer. In the most striking sign to date of surging support for Farage, the poll suggests more than a third of voters will back him on 23 May. It puts his party on 34% of the vote, with less than a fortnight before the election takes place. The poll suggests support for the Conservatives has collapsed amid the Brexit uncertainty, with Theresa May’s party on just 11%. Labour is a distant second, on 21%. The Lib Dems perform the best of any of the openly anti-Brexit parties, one point ahead of the Tories on 12% of the vote. With the Brexit party securing more than three times the level of support for the Tories, the poll confirms the concerns of senior Conservatives that it is haemorrhaging support as Brexit remains unresolved. Just a fortnight ago, the Brexit party was neck-and-neck with Labour on 28%. Now it has a 13-point lead over Jeremy Corbyn’s party. The Conservatives are now only narrowly ahead of the Brexit party when voters are asked who they would vote for at a general election. The Tories are on 22% support, down 4% on a fortnight ago, with the Brexit party on 21% backing. Labour leads on 28%, but is down five points on the last poll. Leave voters seem to be flocking to the Brexit party. A fortnight ago, it was joint first with the Conservatives among leave voters in terms of general election voting, with both on 33%. It now appears to be the clearer choice of leave voters, with 40% saying they will vote for the Brexit party and 27% backing the Conservatives. May is also close to losing her lead over Corbyn as to who voters regard as the best prime minister. Her lead has dropped from four points to just one point. The Opinium poll also found that despite the dominance of Brexit as an issue since the 2016 referendum, there was a significant proportion of voters who did not know each party’s position on it. The poll reveals 36% are not aware of the Conservative party’s stance, while 38% say the same about Labour. For those who said they knew, 23% think the Conservatives support a soft Brexit, while 23% think they support a hard Brexit. For the Labour party, 25% think they support remaining in the EU, while 31% think they support a soft Brexit. Opinium polled 2,004 people online between 8-10 May.
Former PM is concerned ‘dirty money’ from foreign donors could reach Nigel Farage’s party   The Electoral Commission is under mounting pressure to launch an investigation into the funding of Nigel Farage’s Brexit party because of concerns that its donation structure could allow foreign interference in British democracy. Before Thursday’s crucial European elections, Gordon Brown has written to the Electoral Commission calling on it to urgently examine whether the party has sufficient safeguards on its website to prevent the contribution of “dirty money”. The former Labour prime minister will use a speech in Glasgow on Monday to say an investigation into the Brexit party’s finances is urgent and essential. “Nigel Farage says this election is about democracy. Democracy is fatally undermined if unexplained, unreported and thus undeclared and perhaps under the counter and underhand campaign finance – from whom and from where we do not know – is being used to influence the very elections that are at the heart of our democratic system,” he will say, according to pre-released extracts. “Now Mr Farage heads a new Brexit party, which is making questionable claims about the true source of its funding at a time when the Electoral Commission has warned of the dangers of multiple, small, anonymous donations being a cover for dirty money.” While other parties require personal information from donors, the Brexit party allows donations of less than £500 via a PayPal account, which critics said leaves the way open to abuse by foreign donors wishing to influence British elections. Richard Tice, the Brexit party’s chair and co-founder, said on Monday he did not know whether the PayPal account allowed the party to receive smaller donations in foreign currencies. “I don’t sit in front of the PayPal account all day, so I don’t know what currencies people are paying in,” he told BBC Radio 4’s Today programme. Asked several times to rule out receipt of such sums from foreign currencies, Tice did not do so. He said: “We’ve got a PayPal account for people who are paying less than £500. Above that we apply the appropriate Electoral Commission rules.” Any complaints, he said, came from “jealous Westminster people who are just aghast at how we can capture the mood of the country”. Brown’s intervention comes after Farage boasted that the party was attracting donations of £100,000 a day. He told the Telegraph that about 2,000 individual donors were signing up daily. It was echoed by Labour’s Ben Bradshaw, who said: “It’s absolutely essential that there’s an urgent investigation into this. “The fact that it’s three years after a referendum that was subverted by dark money, it’s absolutely incredible that nothing has happened. Some at the NCA and at the Electoral Commission have to wake up. We’re facing a real threat to our democracy.” In his speech, Brown will also support calls for the European parliament to examine whether Farage has received undeclared funding personally in his time as an MEP after a Channel 4 investigation found that he had benefited from £450,000 from the businessman Arron Banks. Brown will claim Banks’s commercial interests “have never been fully and satisfactorily divulged”, and point to his “long-term contacts with Russia”. LSE professor Damian Tambini said the loopholes in the donation structure were a serious problem. “Our election finance controls are failing,” he said. “UK law has strict bars on foreign finance of election communications, and overall limits on campaign spending … The Electoral Commission should signal that they are looking into this.” Farage tells supporters the leave campaign has won a victory for 'real people', and says 23 June should go down as 'independence day' Announces his resignation as leader of Ukip for the second time Becomes the party’s interim leader following Diane James’s resignation after only 18 days in the role. Paul Nuttall succeeds Farage as leader in November He meets the then US president-elect, Donald Trump – the first UK politician to do so – telling press afterwards that critics of Trump should 'stop whingeing' and 'just get on with it'  Hired as a commentator for Fox News, providing political analysis for its programmes Tells the Daily Telegraph he will not be standing in the general election on 8 June, because he has decided to 'fight for Brexit in Europe' instead Joins Leave Means Leave to campaign against Theresa May’s Chequers agreement. Is appointed the group’s vice-chairman shortly afterwards Announces resignation from Ukip over the appointment of Tommy Robinson as an adviser to party leader, Gerard Batten, and the decision of the national executive to keep Batten as leader of the party Confirms he will sit as a member of the Brexit party in the European parliament Officially announced as the new leader of the Brexit party Channel 4 News alleges Farage received £450,000 from Arron Banks in the year after the EU referendum The warnings come at a time of more questions about the Brexit party’s links to a disgraced former aide to Farage who was imprisoned in the US after being caught offering money laundering services to undercover federal agents. George Cottrell was with Farage when he was arrested at Chicago O’Hare airport in July 2016. He had been working in Farage’s office and claimed on his LinkedIn account to have co-directed Ukip’s EU referendum campaign fundraising. He was charged with 21 counts including money laundering, wire fraud, blackmail and extortion. He would later plead guilty to participating in a scheme to “advertise money laundering services on a Tor network black market website” and served eight months in prison. After the arrest, Farage called Cottrell a “22-year-old unpaid volunteer and party supporter” and said he knew nothing of the allegations. The Guardian understands that Cottrell has told friends that he is now overseeing the Brexit party’s fundraising operation. On Sunday the Sunday Times also reported that a senior source in the party said that Cottrell had “reprised his role as one of [Farage’s] top fundraisers”.  A spokesman for the Brexit party said Cottrell had “no official position with the party and is not paid by the party”. He declined to deny Cottrell’s unpaid involvement. Cottrell’s previous fundraising role with Ukip was in “an unpaid role”, according to an interview he gave the Telegraph after his release. When told that the Guardian had seen photographs of Farage and Cottrell together in recent months including at Brexit party events, he said: “Tens of thousands of supporters have been to Brexit party events, as has Mr Cottrell. By your logic, all of them have positions in the party.” On the issue of foreign donations, the Brexit party spokesman said: “Rigorous checks are carried out on all donations over the declarable threshold to ensure that they are admissible in accordance with electoral law.” Only donations over £500 have to be declared under British law. The allegation of Cottrell’s involvement with the Brexit party caused shock among MPs. Damian Collins, the chair of the select committee for digital, culture, media and sport, said: “No credible political party in Britain would go anywhere near George Cottrell in the light of his previous convictions. It seems extraordinary that someone convicted of a money-laundering offence should be anywhere near their finances.” Collins added: “There’s this huge question around transparency. No one knows who’s really donating this money. What we do know is that transactions online can be very easily exploited.” Darren Hughes, the chief executive of the Electoral Reform Society, said: “Election rules should be followed to the spirit as well as the letter of the law given the tight timeframes of a campaign. “Issues like these, exacerbated by online campaigning, once again demonstrate why we need a comprehensive review of our electoral laws to ensure they are fit for the 21st century.” A spokesperson for the Electoral Commission pointed the Guardian to a previous statement. “The Brexit party, like all registered political parties, has to comply with laws that require any donation it accepts of over £500 to be from a permissible source,” they said. “It is also subject to rules for reporting donations, loans, campaign spending and end-of-year accounts. “These rules are in place to ensure fairness and transparency of all political party finance. As part of our active oversight and regulation of these rules, we talk regularly to parties, including the Brexit party, about ensuring they have robust systems in place so that they comply with the law. If we see evidence to suggest the rules have been broken, we will consider it in line with our enforcement policy.”
Tory leadership frontrunner hardens position as Eurosceptics extend influence on faltering campaign    Boris Johnson has hardened his position on leaving the EU “do or die” by the end of October, as hardline Eurosceptics extended their influence on his faltering campaign to be prime minister. The frontrunner toughened his Brexit stance as criticism continued over his refusal to answer questions about a police visit to his flat following a loud late-night altercation with his girlfriend, Carrie Symonds. In a round of interviews designed to put the focus back on his EU policy and away from his personal life, Johnson appeared to signal there was an increasing prospect of a no-deal Brexit three months after he would take office. A late-night altercation between Tory leadership favourite, Boris Johnson, and his partner, Carrie Symonds initially changed the dynamics of Johnson's campaign. He had been either invisible or deliberately sober to the point of dullness, when his usual primary draw to Tory members is a self-created sense of optimism and fun. Much is also made of his supposed broad appeal to the electorate, evidenced by two terms as London mayor. His bizarre claim to make model cardboard buses has raised eyebrows. In most political contests, Johnson’s character – he has lost more than one job for lying, and has a complex and opaque personal life – would be a big issue, but among the Tory faithful he seemingly receives a free pass. It remains to be seen what impact that late-night police visit will have on his chances.  He has promised to push for a new deal while insisting the UK will leave the EU come what may on 31 October, even if it involves no deal. While his hard Brexit supporters are adamant this is a cast-iron guarantee of leaving on that date, elsewhere Johnson has been somewhat less definitive. Asked about the date in a BBC TV debate, Johnson said only that it was 'eminently feasible', although he then went on to tell TalkRadio that the 31 October deadline was 'do or die'. His main pledge has been to raise the threshold for the 40% higher tax rate from £50,000 to £80,000, at a cost of almost £10bn a year, which would help about 3 million higher earners, a demographic with a fairly sizeable crossover into Tory members. Johnson’s camp insist it would be part of a wider – and so far unknown – package of tax changes. He has said relatively little, beyond promising a fairly small increase in schools funding, as well as talking about the need to roll out fast broadband across the country. Johnson has generally hinted he would loosen the purse strings, but given his prior fondness for big-ticket projects – London’s cancelled garden bridge, the mooted 'Boris island' airport – perhaps expect more of a focus on infrastructure projects than services. This is unlikely to be a big issue for Conservative party members, and Johnson has not said much on this beyond confirming his general support for the new government target of cutting greenhouse gas emissions to a net zero by 2050. Also unlikely to be a big issue among Tory members, beyond vague platitudes on 'global Britain', it could be a weak spot for Johnson given his poor performance as foreign secretary. He was seen as something of a joke by diplomats – both UK and foreign – and is likely to face more questioning over his gaffe about the jailed British-Iranian woman Nazanin Zaghari-Ratcliffe Peter Walker Political correspondent Johnson first doubled down on his commitment to leaving on 31 October in an interview with Talkradio, saying he was in no way reneging on his firm pledge. “We are getting ready to come out on 31 October. Come what may,” he said. Asked to confirm this, he added: “Do or die. Come what may.” He then said he would scrap Theresa May’s withdrawal agreement and seek a completely new deal before then, as minor changes would not satisfy him. “I mean more than a change,” he said. “It’s got to be, we need a new withdrawal agreement – if we’re going to go out on the basis of a withdrawal agreement.” Not only has the EU said it will not reopen the withdrawal agreement, but the timetable would be extremely tight as parliament is in recess over the summer and then sitting for about 10 days before party conference season begins. MPs return midway through October, just a few weeks before the deadline. Johnson then emphasised his position on leaving by 31 October yet again by writing a letter to Jeremy Hunt, his Tory leadership opponent, challenging him to commit to that date “come what may”. Hunt replied with a dig that Johnson could find out his policy if he turned up to a Sky News head-to-head debate on Tuesday night that Johnson has refused to attend. “Hi Boris, it’s good to talk. But no need for snail-mail, why not turn up to Sky tonight and I’ll give you full and frank answers?#BoJoNoShow,” he tweeted. Hunt also tried to claim his Brexit policy was similar to Johnson’s but that he would be a more trusted negotiator to deliver changes that could get through the UK parliament. “Who is the person that we trust to send to Brussels on behalf of the British people and come back with a deal, and that has to be someone that they trust, that they’re prepared to talk to, because in the end you don’t do a deal with someone you don’t trust,” Hunt told the BBC in an interview. In fact, Hunt’s stance is more moderate than that of his rival as he has not committed to leaving on 31 October if he needs more time to do a deal. Johnson also wants to throw out the withdrawal agreement for a new one, while Hunt would be seeking more modest tweaks. In another sign that Johnson’s campaign was taking a more hardline turn, he appointed Iain Duncan Smith, a veteran Eurosceptic and former Tory leader, as his campaign chief. Johnson also revealed Mark Fullbrook, a business partner of the Australia election guru Lynton Crosby, would be formally joining the team. Sources close to the campaign said Eurosceptics in the party were increasingly turning the screws on Johnson by warning they would withdraw support for his government if he fails to take the UK out of the EU by 31 October. One of the 28 “Spartan” MPs who voted against May’s withdrawal deal said they would not tolerate minor changes to the agreement repackaged and sold as a great new deal. He said they were working on the assumption that Johnson was heading for a no-deal Brexit and parliament could either be not consulted or simply ignored. Johnson appeared to bear out that strategy in his Talkradio interview in which he said he could categorically rule out an extension to article 50, meaning he believes he has a way to stop parliament blocking a no-deal Brexit. “It would be up to the prime minister of the day. I have myself to decide under the current terms of the extension that we have, to apply for such an extension. And it is up to the EU to decide whether to grant it. At the moment, the law says that the UK is leaving the EU, international treaty law says the UK is leaving the EU on 31 October.” At the same time, up to a dozen MPs on the centrist wing of the party, such as Ken Clarke and Philip Hammond, have been warning they could bring down the government in a confidence vote together with opposition parties if Johnson tried to exit without a deal. In an earlier interview on LBC radio, Johnson dismissed the idea his Brexit plans could be hampered by Tory rebels, saying the party was “staring down the barrel of defeat” if it did not deliver a departure plan, which would focus minds. Johnson has been criticised for hiding during the campaign but he attempted to neutralise that criticism with a series of choreographed campaign visits on Tuesday including a speech to a horticultural society and a walk down a high street in Surrey. He conducted the round of media interviews and was filmed on the campaign trail, after keeping a low profile for the first part of the campaign and dodging questions over the weekend about the screaming row with his partner that prompted a neighbour to call the police. He was asked 26 times on LBC about the provenance of a photograph showing him with his partner smiling in a Sussex garden, which appeared on news websites on Monday. However, Johnson refused every time to say whether it was staged, who released it and whether it was recent. “Newspapers will print whatever they are going to print,” he said. “The longer we spend on things extraneous to what I want to do, the bigger the waste of time.” His mood was subdued at a hustings in Birmingham on Saturday, the day after the story of the row broke in the Guardian, where he told the event’s moderator, Iain Dale, that people did not want to know “about that sort of thing”. But a film has emerged of him giving a rabble-rousing speech to a private garden party later that day, telling Conservative members that the NHS absolutely needs “reform” and firing them up for a general election by asking them to be ready to “wallop Jeremy Corbyn”. Asked by one party member what he would do with the NHS, Johnson told the crowd the health service was a “crowning glory” but was “not getting the kind of support and indeed the kind of changes and management that it needs”, suggesting he as prime minister would aim to undertake an overhaul of the health service. He said Simon Stevens, the NHS chief executive, had once helped him get elected president of the Oxford Union as a student, and together they would “sort things out”. In remarks that may alarm those opposed to another reorganisation of the NHS, Johnson said: “It needs more money but where you are absolutely right is that it needs reform.” Jonathan Ashworth, the shadow health secretary, said the comments were “alarming but unsurprising given the hard-right agenda Johnson has been putting forward”. “His tax plans will benefit the richest, he’s the biggest defender of the bankers who crashed the economy, and he’s been buddying up with Trump to sell off our NHS to US corporations,” he said. “His comments to Tory party members about his plans for the NHS need to be clarified immediately.”
Tory leadership hopeful says he would tell bankrupt firms their sacrifice was worth it   Business groups have expressed anger after Jeremy Hunt said he would willingly tell people whose companies went bust after a no-deal Brexit that their sacrifice had been necessary. In a notable escalation of his rhetoric on Brexit, the foreign secretary, who is trailing Boris Johnson in the Conservative leadership election, also said he would actively pursue no deal if a new departure plan looked impossible by the start of October – less than 10 weeks after the new prime minister takes office. Hunt’s shift towards the harder language associated with Johnson, who has promised to deliver Brexit by 31 October “do or die”, has alarmed some fellow Conservatives. A senior party source said it was “shocking to hear an allegedly sensible politician talk so frivolously about the livelihoods of millions of people”. Throughout the leadership campaign Hunt has stressed the potential damage from a no-deal departure, saying he would only pursue it if there was no other way to deliver Brexit. But interviewed on BBC One’s the Andrew Marr Show, Hunt said it could become a policy goal if his plan to renegotiate a departure deal with the EU – dismissed by Brussels as unrealistic – proved impossible. “At the beginning of October, if there is no prospect of a deal that can get through parliament, then I will leave at the end of October because that is our democratic promise to the British people,” Hunt said. Asked whether, under such a policy, he would be willing to look the owners of family businesses in the eye and say they should be prepared to see their companies go bust to ensure a no-deal Brexit, Hunt said: “I would do so but I’d do it with a heavy heart precisely because of the risks.” In a speech on Monday, Hunt will try to allay worries about the potential impact of no deal with a self-styled 10-point plan for preparations, including £6bn to protect fishing and agriculture. It would also include a new, dedicated committee with special powers to boost no-deal planning and a logistics committee to assist with imports and exports. “If you’re a sheep farmer in Shropshire or a fishermen in Peterhead I have a simple message for you: I know you face uncertainty if we have to leave the EU without a deal,” Hunt is to say at the speech in London. “I will mitigate the impact of no-deal Brexit on you and step in to help smooth those short-term difficulties. If we could do it for the bankers in the financial crisis, we can do it for our fisherman, farmers and small businesses now.” If he became prime minister, Hunt is to say in his speech, his chancellor would begin work on a no-deal Brexit budget, which would slash corporation tax and move 90% of high street businesses out of rates. Earlier on Marr, Hunt said he would tell business owners that a no-deal Brexit was necessary to maintain the UK’s image abroad as “a country where politicians do what the people tell them to do”. He added: “So if, in order to do what the people tell us to do, we have to leave without a deal, I would do that. But I would find support for those companies to help them weather the storms.” His style is notably technocratic, with few rhetorical flourishes and an emphasis on his consensual approach and long record as a minister, notably during more than five years as health secretary, a traditional graveyard of ministerial careers. Hunt’s attempts to talk up a backstory as an 'underestimated' entrepreneur can fall flat given he is also the son of an admiral and was head boy at Charterhouse. Overall, Hunt’s approach can seem uninspiring and hard to pin down in terms of core beliefs, hence the 'Theresa in trousers' nickname among some Tory MPs. Hunt has made headlines by promising to repeal the ban on fox hunting, while always facing scrutiny on his views on the availability of abortion. His campaign team have decided to take the fight directly to rival Boris Johnson though, with Hunt taking part in a Twitter Q&A session as a direct response to Johnson's refusal to appear on a Sky TV head-to-head debate. The hashtag: #BoJoNoShow. He says a new deal with the EU is possible by 31 October and he would send a cross-party negotiating team to Brussels, including members of the DUP. He would countenance leaving the EU without a deal but is notably more wary than rival Boris Johnson. Has been fairly silent on this, beyond a proposal to cut corporation tax from 19% to 12.5%, which according to the IFS would cost an estimated £13bn a year. Even at 19%, the UK rate is well below European and global averages. Before the campaign began he called for a doubling of defence spending, but he has since pulled back slightly, saying only that it should increase. He has argued that cuts to social care budgets had gone too far. Hunt backs the 2050 target for zero net carbon emissions and has called for 'sensible tax incentives' to encourage green initiatives, but very little beyond this. A likely strength for him, as he has been seen as a solid foreign secretary, an impression burnished by taking over from the chaotic Johnson. This has been a key part of his pitch. Peter Walker Political correspondent Leading business groups have been careful to not criticise either Hunt or Johnson directly during the leadership campaign, but the comments prompted strong warnings against such policies. Make UK, which represents manufacturing and engineering firms, said these companies were “the backbone of British industry, and the suggestion that losing them is a price worth paying leaves many speechless”. Leaving without a deal would be “an act of economic vandalism”, a spokesman said. “We call on any and every politician advocating no deal to think carefully about the enormous harm it would do to businesses and the millions of families who rely on them.” Claire Walker, the co-executive director of the British Chambers of Commerce, said: “Politicians must remember that it is businesses that create jobs and opportunities across our communities, and it is the role of government to create the conditions necessary for these firms to survive and grow, now and in the future. A focus on ideology rather than practicalities does not serve the interests of the UK, or its people, well.” A CBI spokesman said: “The case for any new prime minister to secure a good deal with the EU is clearcut. Jobs and livelihoods will depend on it.” The shadow chancellor, John McDonnell, said the comments showed that to win votes from Tory members Hunt was “willing to sacrifice the jobs and living standards of millions”, calling this “the height of irresponsibility”. The senior Conservative source said there was intense worry within the party that Hunt’s comments showed both candidates were trying to “pander to the hardcore right of the party”. The source said: “It’ll be the poorest who will be hit the hardest by no deal. People who use a wage to keep a roof over their heads and food in their stomach – not Jeremy or Boris or any other taxpayer-subsidised MP. “Those in ivory towers need to realise that this is real people’s lives we’re dealing with, not just party politics. The leadership candidates need to get over themselves and do what’s best for the country and deliver a deal.” One leading centrist Tory MP said should be appealing to “the mainstream moderate business wing of Conservatism”. They said: “He will never win by aping Boris as the toughest Brexiter. Theresa May tried that and ended up tying herself in knots.” Hunt has faced criticism from Johnson over his insistence that if a deal was very close by 31 October he might briefly extend the deadline to finalise it. He told Marr that this was actually more likely to make Brexit happen. “If we got to the end of October and we’ve got a deal and we’re trying to get it through parliament but we need a few more parliamentary days, I’m not going to rip up that deal. Boris is,” he said. In his own TV interview, Johnson insisted he was happy to take responsibility for the consequences of Brexit. In sometimes tricky exchanges on Sky’s Sophy Ridge on Sunday, during which he appeared to not know the current hourly rate for the national living wage, Johnson denied that he tried to avoid accountability for his words and actions, saying he accepted liability for Brexit. “I played a part in that campaign and I’m very proud of what we did but I take personal responsibility now for what is happening to our country, for the drift and the dither, and the indecision, and the failure to be sufficiently robust in the negotiations which we’ve seen so far,” he said.
Foreign secretary says it is wrong to commit rigidly to leaving the EU by 31 October   Jeremy Hunt has said the Brexit deadline of 31 October should not be a “hard stop” and that Boris Johnson is posing a “stark choice”, between leaving the EU without a deal and a general election. As the five remaining rivals to Boris Johnson prepare for a televised debate on Sunday evening, Hunt warned it would be wrong to commit now to leave the EU by Halloween, come what may. He told BBC One’s The Andrew Marr Show: “I want to make an argument that what Boris is offering – a hard stop at any cost, on 31 October – means that he is effectively committing the country to no deal … or an election, if parliament chooses to stop that. And my argument is, are those really the best that we as Conservatives can offer the country?” Hunt’s comments contrasted with a fresh warning from his fellow leadership contender Dominic Raab on Sunday that the Tory party would be “toast” if it failed to take Britain out of the EU by the end of October. Hunt said he wanted to negotiate a new package with the EU27. “It’s not impossible to do this by 31 October, but it will be difficult,” he said. “I’m not committing to a 31 October hard stop at any cost, because I don’t think you can make that guarantee.” Hunt said recent discussions with EU leaders, in his post as foreign secretary, had convinced him there could be a negotiated way through the Brexit impasse. “Approached by a British PM, someone they were willing to deal with, who had ideas to solve the Irish border, they would be willing to renegotiate the package,” he said. “In particular, they’re prepared to consider whether you could get much more detail over the future relationship, so that you wouldn’t need the backstop.” Earlier, Raab had highlighted the risks of “corrosion of public trust” for his party, with the Brexit party leading in several polls. “The Tory party will be toast unless we’re out by the end of October. People need to wake up to this. We’ve seen from the Peterborough byelection, we’ve seen it from the European elections,” he said, referring to “the frustration, the scandal people feel” over the delays to Brexit. “The Conservatives cannot win an election unless we’ve delivered Brexit,” he added, speaking to Sophy Ridge on Sky News. Raab also again declined to rule out proroguing parliament, if as prime minister he believed a no-deal Brexit was the right course and MPs sought to block it. “I don’t think it’s something we would want to do,” he said, “and I think it’s very unlikely. But what’s really scandalous about this, is where people have been trying to sabotage the will of the people, and break their promises left, right and centre.” Brexit has dominated the early stages of the leadership debate. Michael Gove, who came third in the first MPs’ ballot on Tuesday, has suggested he would be willing to delay by a few weeks or months if necessary to get the right deal, but Johnson, who is the overwhelming frontrunner, has insisted he will leave on time. Rory Stewart, Johnson’s fellow old Etonian, who picked up the support of the defence minister Tobias Ellwood on Sunday, told the BBC he did not know what Johnson’s Brexit plan really was. “This is the moment, in this leadership race, to say who – and it’s a very brutal question – who do you trust to be your prime minister? How is Boris going to deliver Brexit? How?” “I don’t even know what he believes – he won’t talk to me, he won’t talk to you, he won’t talk to the public,” he said, before reiterating his insistence that he would not take a cabinet job if Johnson were to offer him one. “I would not serve,” he said. Johnson is not taking part in Sunday’s TV debate, after warning he feared it could be “cacophonous” – but will join a similar event on Tuesday night, after at least one more leadership contender has been knocked out. Stewart said his approach would be to try to get the existing Brexit deal through parliament, telling MPs: “This is the last-chance saloon. Get it done.” If that failed, he would convene a citizens’ assembly to decide what should happen next. “All these other people are just saying: I’m just going to go to Europe, and I’m going to shout, and I’m going to get us out, ‘Give me a deal,’” he said. Sajid Javid used an article in BrexitCentral on Sunday to set out more details of his approach. He said he would aim to deliver “the only thing that’s got through parliament: leaving Europe with alternative arrangements on the backstop”. And he repeated his offer to subsidise any spending by the Irish government necessary to provide border checks. Johnson has also talked about alternative arrangements, but Raab said: “I’m not quite clear what Boris’s plan is.” Raab has pitched himself as the most determined Brexiter, but many of the most ardent Tory leavers, including Steve Baker and Jacob Rees-Mogg, are backing Johnson instead. Raab sought to burnish his reputation as the most resolute leaver on Sunday, saying: “All those candidates that are going weak at the knees, and saying, ‘I’m not sure about this or that,’ they’re sending a message to the EU that, frankly, they can take us for a ride. We’ve had three years of that, and, frankly, it’s time to get this done.” And while he came fourth in the first round of voting, with 27 supporters, he insisted he still hoped to achieve the 33 votes necessary to progress to the next round, when MPs take part in the second round on Tuesday. “We’ve had extra support coming in, so I’ve got a good base, and we’re well-placed to build some momentum. The race hasn’t really started,” he said.
Labour-led attempt to stop the UK leaving without a deal is defeated, in move that could help Boris Johnson   Conservative leadership candidates including Boris Johnson hoping to force a “deal or no deal” Brexit in October have been handed a boost after MPs defeated a Labour-led attempt to tie the next prime minister’s hands. Labour vowed it would not end efforts to stop no deal but the defeat bolstered Johnson’s claim at his leadership launch that MPs would not be prepared to “reap the whirlwind” of halting Brexit entirely as Tory MPs prepared for the first round on voting to choose the next prime minister on Thursday. Tory MPs cheered as the motion was defeated by a majority of 11 on Wednesday night, after which Jeremy Corbyn was heard to say: “You won’t be cheering in September.” The former Conservative MP Nick Boles warned opponents of a no-deal departure were fast running out of options – apart from a confidence vote to bring down the government. “No-deal Brexit on 31 October is back to being a racing certainty,” he said. “It is very hard to see where any further legislative opportunities will come from. So it’s now a question of politics – specifically whether a PM pursuing a no-deal Brexit can command and sustain the confidence of the House of Commons.” Johnson officially launched his campaign on Wednesday saying he believed a new government “with a new mandate, a new optimism, a new determination” could leave the EU with an amended deal by 31 October. However, the leadership frontrunner warned that he was determined to leave the EU by that date, whether he had achieved a new deal or not. “I am not aiming for a no-deal outcome, I don’t think we can end up with any such thing. But it is only responsible to prepare vigorously and seriously,” he said. Johnson refused to say what he would do if he had not secured an improved deal in time for 31 October – or whether he would resign if the deadline were not met or no deal was prevented. At 11pm UK time on 31 October the UK would, by default, become a “third country” in terms of relations with the EU, with no overarching post-Brexit plan in place and no transition period. The UK would no longer be paying into the EU budget, nor would it hand over the £39bn divorce payment. The UK would drop out of countless arrangements, pacts and treaties, covering everything from tariffs to the movement of people, foodstuffs, other goods and data, to numerous specific deals on things such as aviation, and policing and security. Without an overall withdrawal agreement each element would need to be agreed. In the immediate aftermath, without a deal the UK would trade with the EU on the default terms of the World Trade Organization (WTO), including tariffs on agricultural goods. The UK government has already indicated that it will set low or no tariffs on goods coming into the country. This would lower the price of imports – making it harder for British manufacturers to compete with foreign goods. If the UK sets the tariffs to zero on goods coming in from the EU, under WTO “most favoured nation” rules it must also offer the same zero tariffs to other countries. WTO rules only cover goods – they do not apply to financial services, a significant part of the UK’s economy. Trading under WTO rules will also require border checks, which could cause delays at ports, and a severe challenge to the peace process in Ireland without alternative arrangements in place to avoid a hard border. Some no-deal supporters have claimed that the UK can use article 24 of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (Gatt) to force the EU to accept a period of up to 10 years where there are no tariffs while a free trade agreement is negotiated. However, the UK cannot invoke article 24 unilaterally – the EU would have to agree to it. In previous cases where the article has been used, the two sides had a deal in place, and it has never been used to replicate something of the scale and complexity of the EU and the UK’s trading relationship. The director general of the WTO, Roberto Azevêdo, has told Prospect magazine that “in simple factual terms in this scenario, you could expect to see the application of tariffs between the UK and EU where currently there are none”. Until some agreements are in place, a no-deal scenario will place extra overheads on UK businesses – eg the current government advice is that all drivers, including lorries and commercial vehicles, will require extra documentation to be able to drive in Europe after 31 October if there is no deal. Those arguing for a “managed” no deal envisage that a range of smaller, sector-by-sector, bilateral agreements could be quickly put into place as mutual self-interest between the UK and EU to avoid introducing or to rapidly remove this kind of bureaucracy. Martin Belam Speaking after the defeat in the Commons, the shadow Brexit secretary, Keir Starmer, said Labour would continue its cross-party efforts to stop no deal. “Labour stands ready to use whatever mechanism it can to protect jobs, the economy and communities from the disastrous consequences of a no-deal Brexit,” he said. “Any Tory leadership candidate should know that parliament will continue to fight against no deal.” One shadow minister said opponents of a no-deal Brexit had missed a crucial opportunity and believed they had been scuppered by the timing. “This isn’t the end of it. We’ll just have to be doubly creative,” they said. “The timing in the midst of [the] Tory leadership [contest] is poor, but not our choice.” Eight Labour MPs including Caroline Flint, John Mann and Graham Stringer voted with the government against the motion and 13 more abstained. Ten Conservative MPs voted with Labour. The debate before the vote revealed fraying tempers in all wings of both parties. The Labour MP Gareth Snell, who represents the leave-voting seat of Stoke-on-Trent Central, said he regretted not voting for Theresa May’s Brexit agreement. He said he would abstain because he could not countenance parliamentary manoeuvres that would lead to a further delay. “We will have been responsible for a no-deal Brexit by default because of our inability to make a decision,” Snell said. The former attorney general Dominic Grieve said he was prepared to resign the Conservative whip and go against the government in a no-confidence vote if it would prevent a no-deal Brexit. “I simply have to say, here and now, I will not hesitate to do that if that is what is attempted,” he said. The motion proposed giving MPs control of the parliamentary agenda in a fortnight’s time. That day could then have been used to begin legislation to prevent the UK from leaving the EU without a deal, though it is uncertain what form this would take. Speaking in the debate, Starmer said MPs had been forced to act because of suggestions from leadership candidates including Johnson and Dominic Raab that the UK would leave – come what may – on 31 October. Raab had even suggested he would be prepared to prorogue parliament to stop MPs’ efforts to prevent a no-deal Brexit. “It will introduce a safety valve in the Brexit process and it will be a reminder to all Conservative leadership candidates that this house will take every step necessary to prevent a no deal,” Starmer said. The motion, which Labour tabled during an opposition day debate, was signed by the former Conservative minister Oliver Letwin and the leaders of the Scottish National party, Plaid Cymru, the Liberal Democrats and the Green party. The Brexit secretary, Steve Barclay, said it was a “blind motion” that gave no indication as to what path MPs would try to pursue to block a no-deal departure, and would have “virtually unlimited scope”. Tory MPs who said they intended to back the plan included Grieve, Antoinette Sandbach, Sam Gyimah and Jonathan Djanogly, plus Boles, who had flown back to the UK specifically to vote on the motion. MPs working across parties believed it was essential to try to start efforts to halt a no-deal Brexit before the next prime minister was installed and prior to the start of the summer recess. There are no further opposition day debates scheduled. Tory leadership candidates including Matt Hancock and Rory Stewart, who have opposed no deal, had earlier made it clear they would not back the motion. But Hancock told the Guardian: “It’s no good just having a Brexit position that is built on either re-running the old plan, which failed; or threatening no deal, when parliament has voted in the past already to block no deal. No deal isn’t a policy choice that is available to the next prime minister.” Earlier, Philip Hammond said Johnson’s Brexit plan was impossible as the UK will not be able to leave the EU with a deal or without a deal by the end of October. Hammond cast doubt on the viability of the Brexit promises of Johnson and other Tory leadership contenders as he gave a speech in Westminster. He said many of the candidates were pledging things that they could not deliver. Asked whether Johnson’s plan to leave on 31 October would work, he said: “I don’t think so … I think it’s not sensible for candidates to box themselves into a corner on this. Parliament will not allow a no-deal exit from the EU and our experience has suggested it may not be that easy to secure a deal in parliament.” The idea of leaving with a deal by that date would be “very difficult or impossible”, he said. Leadership contender Jeremy Hunt was also asked about Hammond’s comments and said: “This is a time for skilled negotiation and not empty threats. I’ve always wanted to keep no deal on the table as one of our negotiating levers but we can’t be blind to the fact that there is a strong majority in parliament against no deal and it’s likely that parliament would find a way to block no deal if that was being pursued by the prime minister. “That’s why we need to find a way through this that gets us a deal. And if we want Brexit we need to choose a prime minister who can get us a deal.”
Survey by Opinium suggests Nigel Farage would be 20 seats short of a majority, with Conservatives reduced to 26 MPs   Nigel Farage’s Brexit party has surged into first place as voters’ favourites, according to a new poll. It is the first time the party has achieved top position in a national poll. The results suggest hundreds of Conservative seats are at risk. The Brexit party’s support increased by two points to 26% of the vote in the latest Opinium poll – for the Observer – which asked people how they would vote in the next Westminster election. Labour is in second place on 22%, but its support has fallen by seven points over the past two weeks. The Tories are third on 17%, with their support down five points, and the Lib Dems are up five points, on 16% of the vote. These results come after a poll last week put the Lib Dems in first place, in another sign that parties with a clear position on Brexit are gaining support while the Conservatives and Labour continue to grapple with their stances on leaving the EU. Both parties are under pressure to set out their pro-Brexit or pro-Remain positions more unequivocally. According to a seat predictor by the Electoral Calculus website, the result would leave Farage 20 seats short of a majority, with 306 MPs. The Conservatives would be reduced to 26 MPs, suggesting they could be the minor party in a coalition with Farage. However, inconsistent swings in different seats make any such predictions very difficult. There is good news for the Greens, who are up eight points to 11% of the vote, but not all the news for the pro-Remain parties is positive. Change UK recorded just 1% support, down two points on Opinium’s previous poll. Most Remain voters (54%) said that Change UK MPs should join the Liberal Democrats to present a united front against Brexit. Theresa May and Labour’s Jeremy Corbyn continue to have incredibly low ratings on the question of who would make the best prime minister. Both are on only 15%, with a record 60% failing to back either party leader. On balance, 45% of the public think May has done a bad job as prime minister, with only a quarter (24%) saying she has done a good job. Half (49%) also think that no one else in her position as prime minister would have done a better job in the circumstances that she faced. In the Tory leadership race, Boris Johnson has the most support (24%) among Conservative voters to be the party’s next leader. The other standout choice is Michael Gove, with 14%. Adam Drummond, from Opinium, said: “All of the big winners from the European elections have seen some sort of a boost, with the Brexit party adding another two points to move into first place, while Labour have fallen back significantly. While the Lib Dems have experienced a boost, the underreported story from the elections and since then has been the Greens, who have gained eight points since our last poll. “While the Brexit party and the Lib Dems have been taking votes from Leavers and Remainers respectively, the Greens are unique in taking votes from both sides of the Brexit divide. “While the usual caveats should apply about how much to read into Westminster voting intention polls, given the proximity to the European elections, the fact is that we might be less than six months out from a general election so these might become relevant very quickly.” Opinium polled 2,005 people online from 28-30 May.
  Boris Johnson’s attempts to appease hardline Tory Brexiters will tilt the party into a “disastrous general election” that could be just months away, senior Conservatives are warning. The runaway favourite to replace Theresa May is being told that the coalition of support set to deliver him Downing Street “won’t survive the autumn”, when he will have to decide whether to accept a deal with the EU or try to force a no-deal Brexit – a move likely to precipitate an election. Senior party figures are already warning of a “wipeout” in some parts of the country, such as Scotland and London, should it go into an election pledging to deliver a no-deal Brexit. They believe that once in office, Johnson will either be toppled by hardline Eurosceptic MPs should he back away from no deal, or provoke an election by pursuing such a policy. With leadership contenders ruling out a coronation on Saturday, Tory critics are demanding increased scrutiny of Johnson’s Brexit plans. David Gauke, the justice secretary, said: “Boris is saying that he will definitely leave the EU by 31 October, but he is refusing to say how he will do this if parliament takes steps to stop a no-deal Brexit. Will he respond by suspending parliament? Will he seek a general election? This lack of clarity is helping him maintain a broad base of support for now but it won’t survive the autumn. This is why his position on Brexit needs to be tested thoroughly now.” Alistair Burt, the former foreign office minister, said: “The risk of a serious confrontation in the party seems to be growing – the only way to avoid this is to get a deal. Jeremy Hunt is the best bet to open up the impasse, otherwise … we seem to be heading for a disastrous general election, with all the risks.” It comes as former Tory chancellor Ken Clarke reveals he would be prepared to vote down a Conservative government led by a new prime minister who tried to push through a no-deal Brexit, which a majority of MPs in parliament oppose. In an interview with the Observer, Clarke said that in those circumstances “then you have to bring that government down”. “If some idiot was sailing into a no-deal Brexit I’d decide politics had finally gone mad and vote against it.” Clarke also said that if it came down to a choice between no deal and a second referendum, he would abandon his lifelong opposition to referendums and back a second public vote. “If the choice eventually became no deal or a second referendum, then they’d try to win my support – I’d stop abstaining and I’d vote for it.” Writing in Sunday’s Observer, Johnson’s closest challenger for the leadership, foreign secretary Jeremy Hunt, takes a swipe at Johnson over his lack of credibility on the world stage. Hunt says that with the UK facing not only Brexit but a series of threats, including Russian aggression, Chinese resurgence and instability in the Middle East, the UK needs a leader with an internationalist outlook. “We cannot become the party that pulls up the drawbridge or sticks two fingers up to the rest of world,” he writes. “It has never been more important to re-engage.” Tory moderates are already convinced Johnson has adopted a Brexit strategy that is impossible to deliver. Former universities minister Sam Gyimah said: “There is no sweet spot between what the [European Research Group] sees as the ideal resolution and what is right for the party and country. You either please them and imperil the government, country and party, or you pivot away from them and your own position is at risk. This is going to come to a head pretty quickly. “For all the differences, this is Theresa May’s script. He will try to say he believes in the project and wants to deliver Brexit, but it is parliament that is standing in the way. This is what Theresa May attempted.” Alan Duncan, a senior foreign office minister, said: “Those more moderate colleagues who are tempted by Johnson need to think if the arithmetic or issues have in any way changed. If they haven’t, then changing leader is not going to change our fortunes.” On Sunday, Lord (John) Kerr, former UK ambassador to Brussels and the author of article 50, attacks the leadership candidates for making promises on Brexit that they will never be able to meet. “What alarms me most about the current Conservative party leadership race is that fiction and fantasy are back, and harsh facts again forgotten, as new promises, no less unrealistic, are made. The unicorns are back, frolicking in the Tory forest. Claims that the withdrawal agreement can be renegotiated ignore the solemn undertakings given by the UK government in March that it will not seek to do so, as well as the EU’s repeated statements saying it will not do so.” Meanwhile, former Tory leadership contender Esther McVey has come out in support of Boris Johnson. Writing in The Sunday Telegraph, McVey – who was eliminated in the first ballot of MPs – said Johnson had agreed to back her agenda for “blue collar Conservatism”.
Tory leadership frontrunner’s claim comes one day after he said UK will leave EU ‘come what may, do or die’    Boris Johnson has said the chances of a no-deal Brexit are a “million-to-one against”, despite promising to leave on 31 October whether or not he has managed to strike a new agreement with the European Union. Johnson, the frontrunner to be prime minister, told a hustings that the chances of a no-deal Brexit were vanishingly small, as he believed there was a mood in the EU and among MPs to pass a new Brexit deal. “It is absolutely vital that we prepare for a no-deal Brexit if we are going to get a deal,” he said. “But I don’t think that is where we are going to end up – I think it is a million-to-one against – but it is vital that we prepare.” He said there was a new feeling of “common sense breaking out” among MPs in favour of passing a deal, despite many of his Eurosceptic backers believing he is readying himself for a no deal Brexit. It comes just a day after he promised in a TalkRadio interview to leave the EU on 31 October “come what may, do or die”, raising fears among moderate Tory MPs and opposition parties that he was intending to push through a no-deal Brexit. The EU has repeatedly said it will not revisit Theresa May’s withdrawal deal and experts are severely sceptical that a new prime minister can secure any changes to the controversial Northern Ireland backstop hated by Eurosceptics by the end of October. Many of Johnson’s Eurosceptic backers are convinced that he will push through a no-deal Brexit by simply ignoring the will of parliament, where a cross-party group of MPs are planning to try everything possible to block this possibility. However, Johnson was supremely confident that he could secure a new deal with the EU that would satisfy parliament. He played down the idea that he would simply sideline parliament or prorogue it in order to secure a departure on 31 October, but did not entirely rule it out. “I’m not attracted to archaic devices like proroguing,” he said. The former London mayor also said it would be “absolutely crazy” to think about a general election before Brexit is done, despite the fact he could be forced into one if MPs vote down his government in a confidence vote. He also said he would not give Nigel Farage a part in EU negotiations, saying the tactic is not to give other parties “the oxygen of publicity”. Challenged if that meant no role at all for the Brexit party leader, he replied: “It’s a pretty clear no ... absolutely not.” Speaking before him at the same hustings, Jeremy Hunt, his opponent in the leadership race, took the opportunity to dismiss one of Johnson’s ideas that the UK could negotiate a standstill agreement to prevent trade tariffs with the EU if it left with no deal under an international mechanism called the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (Gatt 24). “I think we’ve got to knock this Gatt 24 thing on the head,” he said. “You can only get an agreement not to introduce tariffs if both sides agree to that. “So there isn’t a no-deal route that would allow us to take advantage of Gatt 24.” Hunt said he would not accuse Johnson of lying but said that his proposals were factually not possible. Hunt also ruled out an election before Brexit is sorted out and described Labour leader Jeremy Corbyn as a crocodile lurking beneath the water. Earlier in a BBC interview, Hunt described 31 October as a “fake deadline” for leaving the EU in a move that drew derision from Tory Eurosceptics. His allies said afterwards that he had meant to say Johnson’s pledge to take the UK out of the EU by that date was a “fake promise” as it might not be deliverable. Johnson has repeatedly challenged Hunt to commit to the same deadline but Hunt has resisted on the grounds that it would not be sensible to rule out staying a bit longer if the UK were on the brink of a deal. At 11pm UK time on 31 October the UK would, by default, become a “third country” in terms of relations with the EU, with no overarching post-Brexit plan in place and no transition period. The UK would no longer be paying into the EU budget, nor would it hand over the £39bn divorce payment. The UK would drop out of countless arrangements, pacts and treaties, covering everything from tariffs to the movement of people, foodstuffs, other goods and data, to numerous specific deals on things such as aviation, and policing and security. Without an overall withdrawal agreement each element would need to be agreed. In the immediate aftermath, without a deal the UK would trade with the EU on the default terms of the World Trade Organization (WTO), including tariffs on agricultural goods. The UK government has already indicated that it will set low or no tariffs on goods coming into the country. This would lower the price of imports – making it harder for British manufacturers to compete with foreign goods. If the UK sets the tariffs to zero on goods coming in from the EU, under WTO “most favoured nation” rules it must also offer the same zero tariffs to other countries. WTO rules only cover goods – they do not apply to financial services, a significant part of the UK’s economy. Trading under WTO rules will also require border checks, which could cause delays at ports, and a severe challenge to the peace process in Ireland without alternative arrangements in place to avoid a hard border. Some no-deal supporters have claimed that the UK can use article 24 of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (Gatt) to force the EU to accept a period of up to 10 years where there are no tariffs while a free trade agreement is negotiated. However, the UK cannot invoke article 24 unilaterally – the EU would have to agree to it. In previous cases where the article has been used, the two sides had a deal in place, and it has never been used to replicate something of the scale and complexity of the EU and the UK’s trading relationship. The director general of the WTO, Roberto Azevêdo, has told Prospect magazine that “in simple factual terms in this scenario, you could expect to see the application of tariffs between the UK and EU where currently there are none”. Until some agreements are in place, a no-deal scenario will place extra overheads on UK businesses – eg the current government advice is that all drivers, including lorries and commercial vehicles, will require extra documentation to be able to drive in Europe after 31 October if there is no deal. Those arguing for a “managed” no deal envisage that a range of smaller, sector-by-sector, bilateral agreements could be quickly put into place as mutual self-interest between the UK and EU to avoid introducing or to rapidly remove this kind of bureaucracy. Martin Belam When quizzed on domestic policy, Hunt made a suggestion that the government should find a way to allow online voting in elections, saying it must be possible without it causing fraud. The hustings involved pre-vetted questions from the general public being read out to the candidates by a moderator one after the other. Hunt has been pushing for Johnson to face him in head-to-head television debates before ballot papers are sent out to Tory members. However, Johnson has so far only agreed to one ITV event after this has happened, meaning many members will have cast their votes already by that point. In a letter to broadcasters, Hunt urged them to hold the debates anyway with an empty podium for Johnson, in a move that would then allow him to present his arguments. “I urge all broadcasters to press ahead with plans to hold live television events to scrutinise the candidates next week before ballot papers arrive, with or without Boris Johnson,” he wrote. “You will make your own judgements about how best to format the programmes. He may still prove unwilling to subject himself to this scrutiny, but I do not believe it is fair or appropriate to deprive the other candidate of the chance to make their case on account of his shyness.”
  The scene is Europe, about 40 years from now. Climate change has turned the Netherlands into a swamp and Portugal into an economic powerhouse, thanks to wave-energy plants paid for by wealthy Brazilian investors. Across the continent there are fears about Christian fundamentalist terrorists carrying out arson attacks on abortion clinics. Europol use walkable holograms to recreate crime scenes, and swarms of drones patrol the streets of Brussels, the administrative capital of an EU recently expanded to 36 member states. Britain, however, is still part of the bloc of nations. Because, although Margaret Thatcher is by now only vaguely remembered as an “English separatist from the 20th century”, the joke for anyone reading Tom Hillenbrand’s sci-fi thriller Drone State now is that Brexit still hasn’t happened. “One basic rule of dystopian fiction is that the future should be worse than the present,” said the German novelist. “But in this case it turns out I was a bit too optimistic. “In my book Britain has actually worked out how it wants to leave and the EU is preparing a new constitution as a result. The real Brexit is actually much more dystopian.” Since Drone State was published in Germany to critical acclaim in 2014, two years before the EU referendum on EU membership, a new micro-genre has flourished in the country’s publishing industry: dystopian fiction about Brexit Britain. This April there was the publication of GRM: Brainfuck by the acclaimed German-Swiss author and playwright Sibylle Berg, whose black-humoured novel starts in Rochdale around 2010 and ends in a dystopian London of the near future. In May came The Shelter, written by Regine Bott under the pseudonym Kris Brynn, which imagines an English state trying to stem the spread of an antibiotic-resistant disease by dividing survivors into a strict tripartite class system with tiered access to healthcare. Hillenbrand followed up Drone State last year with Hologrammatica, a hard-boiled thriller that provides some comfort to Leave voters: by 2088, England has definitely left EURUS, the recently joined federations of Europe and Russia. “Science-fiction writers always love a lab scenario, where you can try out different outcomes of the future,” said Hillenbrand. “And there is definitely a feeling here that Britain after Brexit will look very different from what it looks like now. Everything seems to be up for grabs: it’s a fantastic blank canvas for any artist.” His two post-Brexit novels are not purely pessimistic about the outcome of the divorce. In Drone State the greater threat is posed by the new EU constitution, and the steps the commission is willing to take to guarantee its ratification. In Hologrammatica, England has found unexpected wealth after buying the Maldives, now renamed New Albion, and building the world’s first “spacelift” there. The only downside is that the union and all old-fashioned nation-states have been dissolved as the global populace scrambles for liveable space on an ever-heating planet. Regine Bott’s and Sibylle Berg’s novels make for less flattering portraits. Both novels predict that Britain’s post-Brexit future will only exacerbate what they see as the UK’s social ills of excessive privatisation and mass surveillance. In The Shelter, as-yet-uninfected citizens inside the protective dome are all fitted with miniature wrist tablets that live-stream their biological data straight to a National Health Service that is no longer free at the point of delivery: the cost of medication, dispensed at self-service points across the city, is only partially covered by the state. “The largest chunk is debited directly via the wristband to the carrier’s account.” For Bott, Britain used to be “the country of my dreams”, a place she visited every other year and whose literature she studied at university.  Berg’s GRM, currently seventh in Der Spiegel’s fiction bestseller list, is less diplomatic. The novel follows the odyssey of a group of disaffected teenagers from Manchester to London, where a universal basic income beckons for those who agree to be chipped like pets. That plot twist apart, most of the misery and deprivation is realistic rather than fantastical. “For me England is the model country in the western world when it comes to the triumph of neoliberalism and digital surveillance,” said Berg. “You can find poverty in every one of the collapsing countries of the western world, but the unsentimental removal from sight of an entire part of the population because it is no longer of use in the value appreciation chain – that is unique to England.” For GRM’s protagonists, only modern British music provides solace and comfort in a cold and soulless world – something the book nods to in its title. In April, the 57-year-old novelist collaborated on a reading tour of Germany with British Grime artists T.Roadz, Prince Rapid and Slix. Painting modern Britain as a dystopia, Berg said, did not require a particularly vivid imagination. “All the technologies I describe in my novel already exist,” she said. “Automised job appraisals, AI-generated scripts, micro-housing, the coupling of surveillance and insurance, the burning council estates: it’s all already here. You just have to look at it and join the dots.”
Tory MP defeats summons to appear over allegations of misconduct in a public office   Boris Johnson has avoided a criminal prosecution over comments he made during the EU referendum campaign about the UK sending £350m a week to Brussels after winning a high court challenge. The district judge Margot Coleman issued the Conservative MP with a summons on 29 May to attend Westminster magistrates court and face three allegations of misconduct in public office. After a hearing at the Royal Courts of Justice in London on Friday, however, Lady Justice Rafferty and Mr Justice Supperstone overturned the decision. Marcus Ball, 29, who claimed Johnson had lied during the 2016 referendum campaign, crowdfunded more than £300,000 online to bring a private prosecution. Rafferty said: “We are persuaded, Mr Darbishire [Johnson’s QC] so you succeed, and the relief that we grant is the quashing of the summonses.” The judges said the reasons for the court’s ruling would be given at a later date. Jason Coppel QC, for Ball, had argued there was a “significant constitutional right” for a person to make a private prosecution and only in exceptional cases was a magistrate’s decision overturned. He argued that while Johnson was the mayor of London he had made an “official case for leaving the EU and used staff and expenses to assist in campaigning”. He said quashing the summons could allow “well-funded defendants to knock out proceedings before it started”. Coppel said it was wrong for Johnson to make “false statements” and “as mayor and MP, the office-holder should conduct himself honestly”. He argued that Johnson’s statement during the hustings had had a “direct impact on public trust” in the most high-profile political campaign for a generation. The £350m figure was emblazoned on the campaign bus used by Vote Leave during the referendum, with the slogan: “We send the EU £350 million a week, let’s fund our NHS instead.” Darbishire had earlier said there was no example of a similar case. There was “no factual example from common law in the world, let alone English authority”, he said. He also questioned whether comments Johnson made during a hustings event amounted to a breach of duty or an abuse of power. He said no complaint had been made to any disciplinary bodies, including the Crown Prosecution Service, and claimed that Ball’s plan was to disrupt Brexit. The private prosecution was “politically motivated hence vexatious”, he said. Following the hearing, Ball said: “We have just given the green light for every politician to lie to us about our money for ever. That is a terrifying idea. “I would ask you, please, all members of parliament, all elected representatives, understand you cannot lie to the public about their money.” He said he would wait until the judges provided their reasons for throwing the case out before deciding his next move.
Before president’s visit, Woody Johnson says every area of UK economy up for discussion    The US will want business access to the NHS in any post-Brexit trade deal, the US ambassador has said, prompting anger from politicians and campaigners before Donald Trump’s state visit to the UK this week. Woody Johnson, who is a close friend of the US president, said every area of the UK economy would be up for discussion when the two sides brokered a trade deal. Asked if the NHS was likely to form part of trade negotiations, Johnson told the BBC’s Andrew Marr Show: “I think the entire economy, in a trade deal, all things that are traded would be on the table.” Asked if that specifically meant healthcare, he said: “I would think so.” His comments were met with alarm from opposition politicians. The shadow health secretary, Jonathan Ashworth, said the comments were deeply concerning. “The ambassador’s comments are terrifying and show that a real consequence of a no-deal Brexit, followed by a trade deal with Trump, will be our NHS up for sale. This absolutely should not be on the table,” he said. “Nigel Farage and the Tories want to rip apart our publicly funded and provided NHS. Labour will always defend it.” Ed Davey, a candidate for the Lib Dem leadership, said the comments showed the NHS would be “up for sale under the Conservatives” and Brexit would leave the UK in a “far weaker negotiating position against Trump and his America First agenda”. Johnson was also pressed on whether the US would seek a loosening of agricultural standards, including the importation of chlorinated chicken. He said the products should be offered to British consumers who could decide whether to buy them. “There will have to be some deal where you give the British people a choice,” he said. “American products can come over and be allowed to come over. Agriculture is extremely important to the president and to any American president … but if the British people like it, they can buy it; if they don’t like it, they don’t have to buy it.” Johnson said complaints about US food standards were ill-informed. “It’s completely safe. They can have a choice, we have five million Brits coming over every year and I’ve never heard a complaint about anything to do with chicken,” he said. Trump, who gave several interviews to UK papers before his state visit on Monday, has suggested the UK should send the Brexit party leader, Nigel Farage, to negotiate its departure from the EU and has said he hopes Boris Johnson becomes Conservative leader. Woody Johnson said on Sunday that Trump’s support for Boris Johnson stemmed from their personal relationship. “He’s known Boris Johnson for a long time and what he’s commenting on is his knowledge of Boris Johnson as a person,” the ambassador said. On Sunday Trump denied calling the Duchess of Sussex “nasty” for having previously criticised him. In a tweet after the Sun made the claim, he said he had “never called Meghan Markle nasty” and claimed the “Fake News Media” had invented his remarks. The Sun posted a recording of the original interview to prove that its reporting was accurate.
Leaving without deal will ‘throw concrete’ in wheels of British-EU trade, says economist   The mounting risk of no-deal Brexit may have pushed the UK economy into a recession already, one of the country’s foremost economic forecasters has warned. Sounding the alarm before the expected elevation of Boris Johnson to Downing Street this week, the National Institute of Economic and Social Research (NIESR) said there was a one in four chance the country is in a recession currently. Against a backdrop of renewed uncertainty and the increasing likelihood of no-deal Brexit under a Johnson premiership, growth has stalled in recent months, business investment has faltered and the pound has fallen sharply. Some economists believe the UK economy contracted in the three months to June, marking the first negative quarter in seven years, as a consequence of factory closures planned to avert any potential disruption around the original 29 March Brexit deadline. Official growth figures for the second quarter are due to be published next month. Economists consider two consecutive quarters of economic contraction a recession. NIESR forecasts GDP fell by 0.1% in the second quarter, with a 25% chance that GDP declines again in the third quarter between July and September. However, the thinktank’s central forecast is for growth of 0.2% in the third quarter. “The short-term outlook for the UK economy is very murky indeed, with a significant risk that a severe economic downturn will begin within the next six months,” NIESR said. Warning the risk of leaving without a deal was rising with less than six months left before the next prime minister runs out of time to renegotiate a deal with Brussels, NIESR said the country risked an even more severe downturn in the autumn. It said economic growth over the long run could be damaged by about 5% a year. Jagjit Chadha, director of the thinktank, which is Britain’s longest-established independent research institute, said a no-deal Brexit would in effect “throw concrete” in the wheels of British trade with the EU at a moment when the UK is already “fragile and vulnerable” from a slowdown in growth. “However we look at it, there will not be much economic joy in such an exit,” he added. Alongside domestic uncertainty, growth in the world economy has deteriorated over recent months against a backdrop of rising trade tensions between the US and China, harming business confidence and serving as a brake on growth. NIESR cut its forecasts for economic growth in 2019 and 2020 to 1.2% and 1.1%, down from 1.4% and 1.6% previously, as a result of the loss of momentum. However, it still said its forecasts were based on the next prime minister securing a deal with Brussels this autumn. Acknowledging that the UK crashing out without a deal on 31 October was becoming increasingly likely, the thinktank warned that the pound could plunge by about 10% against the US dollar to about $1.10. Inflation would then likely surge to about 4% as the price of importing goods to Britain rises, the highest level in almost eight years and more than double the Bank of England’s target of 2%. It said Threadneedle Street could cut interest rates by 0.5 percentage points to 0.25% and the Treasury could ramp up spending to offset the hit to the economy, enabling growth to remain at zero next year under such a scenario. However, given the wide degree of uncertainty over the exact impact a no-deal Brexit would have on the UK, it said the outcome could be much worse – with a 30% chance of recession next year. “There is no palpable growth for some years to come following a no-deal Brexit,” Chadha said. The thinktank’s forecast for a no-deal scenario where the UK escapes recession next year could embolden Brexiters. However, it said public borrowing would rise sharply, breaking the Conservatives’ deficit reduction promises. Public borrowing as a percentage of GDP could balloon from the current level of 1.2% of GDP to about 3.8% by 2022 under such a scenario. The Tories have pledged to keep borrowing below 2% by that time.
Institute for Government tells PM there is ‘no such thing as a managed no deal’   Boris Johnson’s ambitious domestic agenda would be crushed by the pressing needs of the emergency that would follow a no-deal Brexit, a new report by a Whitehall thinktank has concluded. The Institute for Government (IfG) warned there is “no such thing as a managed no deal” and the hard Brexiters predictions of a “clean break” from the EU will not materialise. Johnson will begin his first full week in Downing Street by ramping up planning for the possibility of a no-deal Brexit on 31 October, with more than £1bn to be announced within days for preparations by Sajid Javid, the chancellor. He sent out a raft of cabinet ministers over the weekend to talk about “turbo-charging” preparations as part of a publicity blitz, making clear that the UK will be heading for no deal unless EU leaders agree to replace the Irish backstop. The new prime minister is also heading to Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland in the coming days to promise to “strengthen the union”, but he faces a difficult meeting with Ruth Davidson, the Scottish Conservative leader, on Monday as she warned over the weekend that she cannot sign up to his no-deal Brexit strategy. Cost: £9bn. Only 12% of people in the UK earn more than £50,000 a year, so this pledge to move the 40% threshold up to £80,000 would help those on the highest incomes. Cost: £11bn. At present people pay NICs when they earn £166 a week and income tax when they earn £12,500 a year. Johnson wants to gradually align the two systems by raising the NICs ceiling to an annual £12,500. Cost: £4.6bn. Theresa May’s successor says he will raise education spending to £5,000 for every secondary school pupil and £4,000 for each primary school pupil. Cost: £1.1bn. Johnson has promised an extra 20,000 officers. Cost: £250m. This would reverse the BBC - and George Osborne's -decisions over this perk for pensioners. Cost: £3.8bn. There have been reports that the incoming prime minister would like all house sales under £500,000 in England, Wales and Northern Ireland to be exempt from stamp duty. Cost: unknown. Industry experts say this is not feasible in the time available, given coverage is currently less than 10%. Cost: unknown. Johnson said while on the hustings with Jeremy Hunt that he intended to create “about six” free ports – zones designated by the government to pay little or no tax in an attempt to boost economic activity. Cost: unknown. One of Johnson’s big early decisions will be whether to scrap HS2 and spend the money on alternative rail infrastructure such as linking the big cities of the north through HS3. Any savings generated by scrapping HS2 will almost certainly be recycled into other transport projects. Cost: unknown. The government employs one in six of the people working in the UK, so it would be affected by Johnson’s promise to raise the national living wage. Larry Elliott Economics editor In its report on no deal, the IfG predicted that the union of the United Kingdom would come under “unprecedented pressure” in the event of a no-deal Brexit, with Northern Ireland “most acutely affected”. It said that legislation to introduce direct rule in Northern Ireland with immediate effect would be needed to get through a no-deal Brexit if the devolved government is not restored by the end of October. “Johnson may well find that having left one political union, he spends an increasing proportion of his time trying to keep another together,” it said. The IfG, which has offices next to the Foreign Office near St James’s Park, has regular access to lawmakers and top officials enabling it to give frank assessments on all aspects of government. Its publication comes just days after Johnson unveiled plans for a high-speed rail link between Manchester and Leeds, 20,000 new police officers and extra money for social care and schools. The pledges appear designed to appeal to the public in an election, fuelling speculation that Johnson is preparing for one even though he is publicly ruling it out before Brexit happens. However, the report outlines just how uncertain the future would be for Boris Johnson after a crashout, suggesting everything other than Brexit would be overshadowed. In another sign of the uncertainty Johnson faces, the owner of Vauxhall warned on Sunday that it will close its Ellesmere Port plant with the loss of 1,000 jobs if Brexit renders it unprofitable. “No deal is a step into the unknown: the prime minister’s second 100 days will be even more unpredictable than his first,” the report says, adding that the EU is unlikely to agree to negotiate any “side deals” to soften the impact. “Rather than ‘turbo-charging’ the economy, as Johnson has suggested, the government is more likely to be occupied with providing money and support to businesses and industries that have not prepared or are worst affected by a no-deal Brexit – as well as dealing with UK citizens in the EU, and EU citizens here, who have been similarly caught out,” it says. The authors reveal that the government’s planning assumptions are “locked away on secret computers known as Rosa terminals” across Whitehall in classified documents but warns that “as the name suggests these are just assumptions”. Nobody can predict how the country, businesses and ordinary voters will react to no deal, something the IfG has been saying for some time, say the authors, Joe Owen, Maddy Thimont Jack and Jill Rutter. “The risk registers that exist across Whitehall for a no-deal Brexit may have detailed plans for how to manage anticipated risks. “But some of the biggest potential headaches will come from those issues that have not been foreseen,” the reports concludes. With Labour, the Scottish National party, Liberal Democrats and up to 40 backbench Tories all pledging to fight a no-deal Brexit, Johnson has begun a campaign to try to convince the public and MPs that his government will be ready if necessary. No 10 revealed that Johnson has tasked a series of new cabinet committees with preparing for no deal, with overall responsibility going to Michael Gove, effectively now a minister without portfolio. The prime minister spoke to his cabinet at lunchtime on Sunday to outline a new “daily operations committee” codenamed XO. It will be chaired by Gove and meet in the Cobra emergency situation room, with live actions, deadlines and lines of accountability on screens at every meeting. Others involved include an all-male lineup of Javid; the foreign secretary, Dominic Raab; the Brexit secretary, Steve Barclay; and Geoffrey Cox, the attorney general. There will be two other Brexit committees chaired by the prime minister – an exit economy and trade committee – meeting regularly, and an exit strategy committee meeting twice weekly. The following people are in Boris Johnson's first cabinet: Sajid Javid, chancellorDominic Raab, foreign secretaryPriti Patel, home secretaryMichael Gove, chancellor of the Duchy of LancasterRobert Buckland QC, lord chancellor and justice secretaryStephen Barclay, Brexit secretaryBen Wallace, defence secretaryMatthew Hancock, health secretaryAndrea Leadsom, business secretaryLiz Truss, international trade secretaryAmber Rudd, work and pensions secretaryGavin Williamson, education secretaryTheresa Villiers, environment secretaryRobert Jenrick, housing secretaryGrant Shapps, transport secretaryJulian Smith, Northern Ireland secretaryAlister Jack, Scotland secretaryAlun Cairns, Wales secretaryBaroness Evans, leader of the House of LordsNicky Morgan, DCMS secretaryAlok Sharma, international development secretaryJames Cleverly, party chair and minister without portfolio These people also attend full cabinet meetings: Rishi Sunak, chief secretary to the TreasuryJacob Rees-Mogg, leader of the House of CommonsMark Spencer, chief whipGeoffrey Cox QC, attorney generalKwasai Kwarteng, energy ministerOliver Dowden, paymaster general and minister for the Cabinet OfficeJake Berry, minister of state at the Cabinet OfficeEsther McVey, housing ministerJo Johnson, universities ministerBrandon Lewis, security minister Dominic Cummings, the mastermind behind Vote Leave, who has been hired as Johnson’s special adviser, has been tasked with delivering Brexit “by any means necessary”. In a meeting with fellow special advisers, he made it clear that he believes No 10 can outmanoeuvre parliamentary critics of no deal and force Brexit to happen by 31 October. However, leading former cabinet ministers – Philip Hammond, David Gauke and Rory Stewart – are all preparing to join the cross-party battle to make sure parliament has a say on the form of the UK’s departure. One source close to the group said Cummings’s confidence of being able to proceed with a no deal if necessary was “misplaced”, while another former cabinet minister described the senior No 10 adviser as a “master of disinformation and spin”. The IfG report warned that Johnson’s emergency efforts, now led by Cummings and Gove, will drain the capacity of Whitehall and government and crowd out his ambitions for domestic reforms. It pointed out that Theresa May said her priority was stamping out “burning injustices” when she assumed power and Johnson’s ambitions could similarly be stymied. “Deal or no deal prime ministers need time, capacity and political capital to spend on their priorities,” the authors say, warning how a Brexit crisis could swamp efforts. “Brexit is likely to preoccupy the work of the civil service for years to come. There will be at least 16,000 officials working on it by the autumn, and that number could still increase,” it says. “Delivering a no-deal Brexit would leave the prime minister with little space for an ambitious domestic agenda. “Whitehall would be working flat out on Brexit for months, with many areas of work extending for years,” the report adds. No matter how keen Johnson and his new team are to institute a new domestic agenda, “major showdowns in parliament would continue, on the budget or Queen’s speech – both due shortly after 31 October”, says the report. “The difficult choices that have been unresolved for the last three years will not evaporate overnight on 31 October. And Brexit will remain the key dividing line in a parliament in which Johnson’s government has a wafer-thin majority, and one that is constantly under threat,” it concludes. In the coming weeks, it says the whole of government must shift to no-deal planning with thousands of civil servants moved to operational no-deal centres immediately. The report also suggests an emergency Brexit budget may be needed in the autumn, something the new chancellor is said to be looking at already. A second report by the Confederation of British Industry out on Monday will say neither the UK nor the EU are ready for no deal.
Email to members stops short of setting out party’s stance in event of early general election   Jeremy Corbyn has sought to draw a line under Labour’s Brexit travails by announcing a “settled” policy of backing remain in any referendum called on a Conservative deal. The Labour leader has been under intense pressure to shift to an overtly anti-Brexit stance, but has insisted on consulting the party’s stakeholders in recent weeks, including the trade unions. In a statement emailed to party members on Tuesday, Corbyn made no reference to what stance Labour would take in the event of a general election in the near future, or whether Labour could enter such a contest saying it would still go ahead with leaving the European Union. But he made clear that if a referendum was called on the Brexit deal negotiated by the incoming Conservative prime minister – or on whether to go ahead with a no-deal Brexit – Labour would support remain. Corbyn wrote: “Whoever becomes the new prime minister should have the confidence to put their deal, or no deal, back to the people in a public vote. In those circumstances, I want to make it clear that Labour would campaign for remain against either no deal or a Tory deal that does not protect the economy and jobs.” The trade unions published a statement on Monday that suggested Labour should seek to negotiate its own, better Brexit deal and then put that to the people, but declined to specify how the party would campaign in the event of that happening. Corbyn acknowledged the issue of Brexit had “been divisive in our communities and sometimes in our party too”. He defended Labour’s position over the past three years, saying it had been right to respect the result of the 2016 referendum. “Labour set out a compromise plan to try to bring the country together based around a customs union, a strong single market relationship and protection of environmental regulations and rights at work. We continue to believe this is a sensible alternative that could bring the country together,” Corbyn said. With Labour under intense pressure from more overtly pro-remain parties, including the Liberal Democrats, the party had already shifted since the European elections towards urging the Conservatives to put their deal to a public vote. But Corbyn had previously stopped short of saying Labour would campaign for remain in the event of a referendum being called. In an interview with the BBC on Tuesday, he said there was no decision yet as to what Labour would argue for in a general election on Brexit. He said: “We will decide very quickly at the start of that campaign exactly what our position will be.” Pressed on whether Labour was now a party of leave or remain, Corbyn said: “We will give people the choice on this. That is something which is surely very important. We respect the result of the referendum. We’ve been through this whole long parliamentary process over the past three years and we’ve made it very clear we will do everything we can to take no deal off the table or stop a damaging deal of the sort Hunt and Johnson are proposing.” Corbyn believes the fact that both sides of the party have signed up to the new policy vindicates his approach of moving gradually, and only after extensive consultation. Labour also hopes that it can now set aside the Brexit row, and gain more of a hearing for other domestic policies. Differences in the shadow cabinet over Brexit policy have repeatedly been played out in public in recent months, with the shadow chancellor, John McDonnell, joining calls for his party to adopt a remain stance. The shadow foreign secretary, Emily Thornberry, was dropped from deputising for Corbyn at prime minister’s questions after criticising the party’s position during TV coverage of the European election results. “We were not clear on the one single thing that people wanted to hear,” she said. Corbyn’s deputy, Tom Watson, has publicly urged party members to make their disquiet about Labour’s position known by signing up to a remain “declaration”. But their fellow shadow cabinet members Jon Trickett and Ian Lavery have repeatedly expressed concerns about the idea of supporting remain in a referendum, fearing it will undermine Labour’s support in leave-voting constituencies at the next general election.
Exclusive: newly elected EU chief suggests there could be emergency help for Ireland   The European commission’s new president has said a hard Brexit would have “massively negative consequences” for both Britain and the EU, and said Brussels could provide emergency help for nations such as Ireland that bear the brunt of such an outcome. In her first interview since narrowly being approved for the post by the European parliament on Tuesday, Ursula von der Leyen said the withdrawal deal concluded between Theresa May and the commission’s chief Brexit negotiator, Michael Barnier, would remain the basis of any future talks. “We don’t want a hard Brexit, it’s a bad outcome for both sides. We have a good withdrawal agreement,” she said in an exclusive interview with the Guardian and four other European newspapers. Both of the contenders to succeed May, Boris Johnson and Jeremy Hunt, have vowed to renegotiate the exit deal with the EU, declaring that the most controversial component, the Northern Ireland backstop, is unacceptable. When asked about their position, Von der Leyen said the withdrawal agreement was “not dead”. She said: “No, it is a good agreement, which was negotiated properly in accordance with the red lines drawn by the British government.” She reiterated her view that the EU should consider extending the current Brexit deadline of 31 October if there were “good reasons” to do so. “A Brexit without a deal comes with massively negative consequences for both sides, not to mention what it means for Ireland. That’s why we need to do everything to strive for an orderly Brexit. And that’s why if there are good reasons for an extension coming from our British friends, I am open to listening to them.” She added: “It would be wrong to see Brexit only as the end of something. The way in which we carry out Brexit will determine our future relationship to our neighbour the United Kingdom. For both sides it is of the highest interest that there is an orderly and good beginning to our future relationships.” In a wide-ranging interview conducted inside the defence ministry in Berlin that she presided over for six years, Von der Leyen told the Europa group of newspapers that the EU would show solidarity with member states hardest hit by a disorderly British exit. In 2012, six major European newspapers came together to launch joint editorial projects to dig deeper into pan-European issues, understand the EU better and investigative the good and bad things emerging from the continent.  Since then, we have jointly investigated the environment, youth unemployment, Brexit, immigration, euroscepticism, the eurozone the Brussels bureaucracy - and even the legacies of the first world war.  We have interviewed prime ministers and presidents, as well as a host of EU leaders, and will continue our efforts long after Britain has left the EU. The six papers are The Guardian, Le Monde, Süddeutsche Zeitung, La Vanguardia, La Stampa and Gazeta Wyborcza She said a European unemployment benefit reinsurance scheme, modelled on measures put in place in Germany to cushion the blow of the world financial downturn a decade ago, could be rolled out across the bloc of 27 nations. In 2008 the German government prevented massive job cuts through a state-subsidised programme to finance reduced working hours. “We can apply this idea to the whole of Europe,” said Von der Leyen. “Should an external shock such as a disorderly Brexit hit two or three countries particularly hard, for example, the unemployment reinsurance scheme could come into force.” One recent report said a no-deal Brexit could do massive harm, especially to the economy in Ireland where it could cost £6bn and lead to an estimated increase in unemployment of 50,000 to 55,000. Asked whether Ireland could be one of the countries to benefit from such emergency help in the case of a no-deal Brexit, Von der Leyen said: “I can’t predict that. But it is right for Europe to help the member states who are hit hardest.” A mother of seven who has held ministerial posts under the German chancellor, Angela Merkel, since 2005, Von der Leyen became the commission’s first female president-elect on Tuesday, winning a vote in the European parliament with the support of 383 MEPs, only nine votes more than required to secure an absolute majority. Critics say the vote has left her at the mercy of nationalists and populists in Poland and Italy who supported her candidacy. “The work is only about to begin,” she said. “In my debates with the political groups and national delegations I came across a lot of openness for constructive collaboration, also from the Green parties. Climate change, digitalisation, the economy, Brexit, security, trade, migration – we have work to do.” In an effort to win votes from Green MEPs, Von der Leyen pledged to make fighting the climate crisis a priority under her presidency. Some have speculated that her ambitious promises on emissions targets may have led some members of the conservative EPP bloc to reject her in Tuesday’s secret ballot. She proposed reducing greenhouse gas emissions by 55% on 1990 levels by 2030. The current target is 40%. Von der Leyen, a Christian Democrat, said she believed action on climate to be of the utmost urgency. “The worst-case scenario will come about if we don’t act with determination, namely rapidly intensifying climate change with all its consequences. The clock is ticking, and we have to act.” She added: “Polluting the environment has to come at a price, which will bring about a change in our behaviour and a lowering of CO2 emissions. If you compare it to the rest of the world, then our industry is already doing well at climate-friendly technology, but we have to get better. “But if industry modernises, we also have to protect it from cheap imports produced in environmentally harmful ways outside Europe’s borders. In coal-heavy regions, especially in central and eastern Europe, we have to support the transition to new clean branches of the economy and protect jobs.” Ursula von der Leyen, born in 1958, is the daughter of Heidi and Ernst Albrecht, the latter having been a senior politician in the centre-right Christian Democratic Union who rose to be governor of the state of Lower Saxony. She spent the first 12 years of her life in Brussels, where her father was serving as a commission official. She studied economics at the universities of Göttingen and Münster before attending the London School of Economics where she used the pseudonym Rose Ladson because she was seen as a potential target for West German leftwing extremists. Von der Leyen then read for a medical degree, becoming a gynaecologist, and only entered politics at 42. A mother of seven, she has held government positions as labour and family affairs minister, driving forward key policies on gender quotas for company boards and improved maternity and paternity pay and rights – policies that initially won her considerable popularity. In 2011, Von der Leyen spoke of her desire for a “United States of Europe along the lines of federal states like Switzerland, Germany or the US”. She has since claimed that Brexit, and the loss of the “pragmatism” of the British in the EU, should propel the bloc towards further integration, and has voiced support for a European army. She is a key ally of Angela Merkel, with whom she has worked since 2005. Like Merkel, she has championed the idea of a close relationship between the EU and UK after Brexit. Von der Leyen, though, has been withering about those who campaigned for Brexit, Describing events since the referendum as a “burst bubble of hollow promises … inflated by populists”. She has cautioned that a no-deal Brexit would be the “worst possible start” to the close long-term EU-UK relationship that Berlin holds desirable. The nicknames she has acquired over the course of her 29-year career in German politics tell their own story. During her time in charge of the family ministry, she was first called Krippen-Ursel (“crèche Ursel”), a conservative closet feminist set on expanding nursery places, and then Zensursula, a control freak who wanted to shield German youth from the dark sides of the internet. When she became Germany’s first female defence minister in 2013, her (mostly male) detractors referred to her as Flinten-Uschi (“shotgun Uschi”), a caricature of the bossy career woman. As commission president, Von der Leyen will represent the EU on the world stage, and a key task will be building a working relationship with Donald Trump’s White House. She has previously criticised a lack of strategy in Trump’s approach to Vladimir Putin’s Russia and has suggested the US president’s frosty relationship with Merkel is based on his outdated view of women. Daniel Boffey in Brussels and Philip Oltermann in Berlin She indicated a more nuanced approach towards states such as Poland and Hungary, which have been brazenly challenging the EU consensus on issues such as migration, the rule of law and press freedom. “I think we have to properly listen to the arguments. For example, the Poles make the justified point that they have taken in 1.5 million people from the Ukraine – a country that has for years been the site of a hybrid war in which people are still dying. We must not ignore that. “Also, the member states who want to go ahead [with a refugee distribution scheme] are already in the process of finding solutions. But it remains the case that in different areas every member state needs the solidarity of the others. We need a fair sharing of the burden – maybe in different areas for different countries.”  Among Brexiters, Von der Leyen has been characterised as a cartoon Eurocrat intent on building “a centralised, undemocratic, updated form of communism”, as the Brexit party leader, Nigel Farage, said in the parliament. She once told an interviewer that her dream was “a united states of Europe – run along the lines of the federal states of Switzerland, Germany or the USA”. Asked whether her dream had changed since then, she said: “It has become more mature and more realistic. In the European Union we have unity in diversity. That is something different to federalism. I think that is the right path.”
Teachers report shift in attitudes since referendum as well as complaints about harder exams   The aftermath of Brexit and the difficulty of new GCSE and A-level exams have combined to put off young people from studying modern foreign languages (MFL) at school, according to a new report by the British Council. While more than two-thirds of teachers surveyed by the British Council said the difficulty of the exams was causing concern, one in four said Brexit had “cast a pall” over pupils learning any foreign languages, with some parents actively discouraging their children. Teachers told researchers that they have seen a shift in attitudes since the Brexit referendum, with one reporting: “We have had parents mention that they do not believe their son or daughter should be studying a language as it is little to no use to them now that we are leaving the European Union.” Another teacher noted comments from pupils, “obviously heard at home, such as now we’ve left/are leaving the EU you won’t need this any more”. The annual report by the British Council on trends in language teaching in England also found a decline in schools taking part in cross-border activities including student exchanges or overseas trips, with schools blaming funding pressures, Brexit uncertainty and safeguarding concerns. School leaders warned that the country was in danger of becoming monolinguistic, with the report finding that children from disadvantaged families and pupils with lower academic results were much less likely to take up languages than their better-off classmates. Vicky Gough, the schools adviser at the British Council, said: “Everyone should have the chance to learn a language but teachers report that many pupils – particularly the most disadvantaged – are being put off by the difficulty of exams and a sense that languages just aren’t for them. “Coupled with a decline in the international experiences offered at primary and secondary schools, these findings paint an alarming picture.” The survey of 1,500 state schools found that disadvantaged pupils were far less likely than their peers to study languages at GCSE, but also revealed that the revisions to exam content introduced over the past three years had a bigger impact on lower attaining pupils. More than 80% of state school teachers said their pupils were now less likely to take modern foreign languages than previously. One teacher told the British Council: “New GCSE is too demanding for lower attaining pupils. They are dissuaded as it is too challenging - even at foundation - and not seen as relevant for them.” Teresa Tinsley, the report’s lead researcher, said the results suggested that language learning in England’s schools was becoming increasingly segregated along socio-economic and academic lines. “Pupils from poorer backgrounds and those who are less academically inclined are much less likely than their peers to acquire any substantial language skills or access foreign cultures in any significant way, challenges that Brexit looks to exacerbate,” she said. “We all know the pressures schools are under, but these inequalities are not good for our society or the future of our country.” But the harder exams were just one factor in the decline in pupils taking modern foreign languages since 2014, with a 19% decline overall in GCSE entries, including 30% falls in French and German and further falls in the numbers taking French, German and Spanish at A-level. Teachers have long complained about the perceived difficulty of gaining high marks in modern foreign languages, especially at A-level, with concerns that results are skewed by the current grading system putting non-native speakers at a disadvantage. The report found that “very few” state secondary schools allowed pupils to study a language other than French, German or Spanish. In state primary schools, language teaching is often “ad hoc and minimal,” it said. “Languages are often seen as lower priority than other subjects and may be pushed out of the timetable, for example during Sats exams in year six,” it noted. Geoff Barton, the general secretary of the Association of School and College Leaders, said: “We are in danger of becoming a monolinguistic country unless we do something to rejuvenate the love and learning of languages. “Schools are also struggling with a severe shortage of language teachers and Brexit could worsen this situation because many of our language teachers come from EU countries.” Ofqual, the exams regulator for England, said it was already conducting a review of grading in GCSE French, German and Spanish. “We take seriously concerns about the perceived difficulty of MFL subjects and continue to look at this issue in detail,” a spokesperson said.
Crashing out could make a united Ireland more likely, Irish PM says   Boris Johnson has set the UK on an apparent course towards a no-deal Brexit by playing down the likelihood of any talks with the EU unless Brussels agrees to scrap the existing withdrawal agreement and Irish backstop, both of which it has ruled out. The seemingly intransigent tone prompted Leo Varadkar, the Irish prime minister, to warn that a no-deal departure could lead more people in Northern Ireland to seek a united Ireland. Johnson’s spokesman said there were no talks with the EU scheduled, and that if they happened it must be “clear what the basis for those discussions needs to be” – a message the new PM then delivered personally to Angela Merkel. According to No 10, Johnson told the German chancellor in a phone call on Friday that while he would seek a deal, the “only solution” involved entirely scrapping the backstop, and that in the interim the UK must prepare for the prospect of there being no deal. Asked earlier if Johnson’s team had sought any talks with Brussels, a Downing Street spokesman said: “What we’ve done is set out our position and say that we are very ready and will be energetic in beginning talking, but we’re also clear-eyed about what needs to happen if we are going to be able to secure a deal which parliament can support. “As I say, we are ready to begin talking, but we are clear what the basis for those discussions needs to be.” The approach from Johnson, who spent Friday visiting a police centre in Birmingham to tout his domestic promise of 20,000 new officers, will boost speculation about a deliberate attempt by a No 10 now packed with former Vote Leave alumni to scupper any negotiated settlement. With a seeming majority in the Commons set on blocking a no-deal departure on 31 October, this could create an impasse in which Johnson could declare an autumn election, for which he will be styled as the champion of Brexit. The strategy does, however, carry risks, not least to the integrity of the UK, even as No 10 confirmed that Johnson would carry the extra, self-appointed title of “minister for the union”. On the visit to Birmingham, Johnson tried to scotch speculation that he was preparing for a general election, saying he would “absolutely not” call for another vote. The prime minister said: “The British people … don’t want another electoral event, they don’t want a referendum, they don’t want a general election. They want us to deliver.” While Johnson has no plans for talks with Brussels, he has spoken to Donald Trump, who called him on Friday evening to congratulate him on his new role and discuss the “unparalleled” trade opportunities offered by Brexit. The US president, who has publicly praised Johnson on numerous occasions, also discussed the Iran crisis. Downing Street said: “The leaders both expressed their commitment to delivering an ambitious free trade agreement and to starting negotiations as soon as possible after the UK leaves the EU.”  However, at an event on Friday in Co Donegal, Varadkar warned that a no-deal Brexit could make some in Northern Ireland “question the union”. “People who you might describe as moderate nationalists or moderate Catholics, who were more or less happy with the status quo, will look more towards a united Ireland,” he said. “And we will increasingly see liberal Protestants and liberal unionists starting to ask the question as to where they feel more at home: is it in a nationalist Britain that is talking about potentially reintroducing the death penalty, or something like that, or is it part of a European home and part of Ireland?” Johnson is likely to face some turbulent encounters with other EU leaders, including at next month’s G7 summit in France. Following Johnson’s call with Merkel, a German spokeswoman, Ulrike Demmer, said he had also accepted an invitation to visit Berlin. He is expected to combine it with a visit to the French president, Emmanuel Macron, to whom he also also spoken. Political insiders in Berlin say the visit could take place as early as next week, but no date has been announced. Michael Roth, Germany’s minister of state for Europe, said Johnson was mistaken “to believe that the European Union will let itself be blackmailed”. He told the TV channel ZDF: “My message to the new British prime minister is very clear. Boris, the election campaign is over. Just calm down.” Following Johnson’s talk with Macron, France’s minister for European affairs, Amélie de Montchalin, said both sides should avoid “games, gestures and provocations” with just three months to go before the UK is due to leave the EU. On the domestic front, Johnson is due to make the latest in a series of ambitious, if so far vague and uncosted, new policies, this time for a new trans-Pennine rail route between Manchester and Leeds. At a speech in Manchester on Saturday, Johnson was expected to say: “It will be up to local people and us to come to an agreement on the exact proposal they want – but I have tasked officials to accelerate their work on these plans so that we are ready to do a deal in the autumn.” The coming weeks, however, look set to be dominated by what could descend into a Brexit standoff, with a united EU27 adamant that there is no time to rewrite the withdrawal agreement, and that the backstop is the only proven way to avoid the risk of a hard Irish border. Pressed on whether Johnson’s stance meant, in effect, that the process was deadlocked, his spokesman said the UK’s priority remained to leave with a deal. “But it is very clear that if we are going to be able to secure a deal that allows us to leave on 31 October, which the prime minister has said we are absolutely going to do, that is going to mean reopening the withdrawal agreement,” he said. Johnson must also factor in concerns about his strategy from worried Conservatives, given that he has a working Commons majority of just three, which seems set to fall further after the Brecon and Radnorshire byelection next week. Tobias Ellwood, the junior defence minister, who strongly opposes a no-deal departure, was sacked from his post on Friday. He later told the Press Association that while “pure Brexiteers” on the Conservative benches wanted no deal, “the damage to our economy will send our party into opposition for a decade”. 
Cabinet blitzes media, saying preparations for crashing out are top priority   Boris Johnson is “turbo-charging” preparations to leave the EU without a deal on 31 October as his government’s number one priority, according to several senior cabinet ministers. The new prime minister sent out cabinet ministers for interviews across newspapers and broadcasters this weekend as part of a publicity blitz about the prospect of a no-deal Brexit. Their message is that the UK will be heading for no deal unless EU leaders agree to replace the Irish backstop. Michael Gove, the new Cabinet Office minister in charge of no-deal preparations, said the government was “operating on the assumption” that Britain would leave without a deal on 31 October and it was a “very real prospect” because EU leaders had so far not changed their minds about scrapping the backstop. He said in the Sunday Times that an agreement might not be struck with Brussels by then, but there was a “new clarity of mission, we will exit the EU on October 31, no ifs, no buts, no more delay”. On Theresa May’s withdrawal agreement, he said: “You can’t just reheat the dish that’s been sent back and expect that will make it more palatable.” At the same time, Sajid Javid, the new chancellor, told the Sunday Telegraph there would be “significant extra funding” this week to get Britain “fully ready to leave” the EU on 31 October, with or without a deal. He said the additional spending would include financing one of the country’s “biggest ever public information campaigns” to ensure individuals and businesses were ready for a no-deal exit. Javid added that he planned to fund 500 new Border Force officers and look at new infrastructure around the country’s ports to minimise congestion and ensure goods could flow. And Priti Patel, the new home secretary, told the Mail on Sunday that she would stop the “automatic right of entry for EU citizens, with or without work” in order to give the “type of preference to brilliant scientists, academics and highly skilled workers that we want to see more of”. Gove and Javid are part of a new “war cabinet” of six key ministers to deliver Brexit by 31 October “by any means necessary”. Rishi Sunak, the new chief secretary to the Treasury, then gave an interview on Sky News saying the government was “turbo-charging” no-deal preparations. “Of course we would prefer to [leave] with a new deal, one that removes this anti-democratic backstop,” he said. “We are prepared to enter into negotiations with the spirit of friendship and determination but if the EU doesn’t want to do that it is right we are absolutely prepared for that. We are turbo-charging preparations for no deal. That is now the government’s number one priority.” Johnson is pushing ahead with the preparations despite cross-party MPs pledging to join forces to prevent no deal. Philip Hammond, the former Conservative chancellor, held private talks with Labour’s Brexit spokesman, Keir Starmer, shortly before Johnson entered Downing Street last Wednesday, to plot cross-party moves aimed at preventing the new prime minister agreeing to a no-deal Brexit. However, Johnson’s new senior adviser Dominic Cummings has put the government on a war footing to face opponents in parliament and achieve an exit on 31 October with or without a deal. He told a meeting of the prime minister’s advisers that he had been tasked with delivering Brexit “by any means necessary”. The following people are in Boris Johnson's first cabinet: Sajid Javid, chancellorDominic Raab, foreign secretaryPriti Patel, home secretaryMichael Gove, chancellor of the Duchy of LancasterRobert Buckland QC, lord chancellor and justice secretaryStephen Barclay, Brexit secretaryBen Wallace, defence secretaryMatthew Hancock, health secretaryAndrea Leadsom, business secretaryLiz Truss, international trade secretaryAmber Rudd, work and pensions secretaryGavin Williamson, education secretaryTheresa Villiers, environment secretaryRobert Jenrick, housing secretaryGrant Shapps, transport secretaryJulian Smith, Northern Ireland secretaryAlister Jack, Scotland secretaryAlun Cairns, Wales secretaryBaroness Evans, leader of the House of LordsNicky Morgan, DCMS secretaryAlok Sharma, international development secretaryJames Cleverly, party chair and minister without portfolio These people also attend full cabinet meetings: Rishi Sunak, chief secretary to the TreasuryJacob Rees-Mogg, leader of the House of CommonsMark Spencer, chief whipGeoffrey Cox QC, attorney generalKwasai Kwarteng, energy ministerOliver Dowden, paymaster general and minister for the Cabinet OfficeJake Berry, minister of state at the Cabinet OfficeEsther McVey, housing ministerJo Johnson, universities ministerBrandon Lewis, security minister There is growing speculation that this could include an election if parliament blocks the new government’s Brexit plans, even though Johnson has ruled that out. The Labour leader, Jeremy Corbyn, said his party was ready for an election, telling Sky that he was “not in the slightest bit” fazed by going up against Johnson. Meanwhile, polls have suggested the Tories were boosted by a “Boris bounce” after the election of their new leader. Since Johnson became prime minister, the Conservatives have gained 10 points to stand at 30%, new polling by Opinium for the Observer showed. The polling shows the Conservatives benefiting from an ebbing of support away from the Brexit party. Despite being pushed into second place, Labour are also up three points to 28% at the expense of the Green party.
Nominee to lead European commission also says ‘precious’ backstop must be defended   Ursula von der Leyen, the nominee to lead the European commission, has signalled she will not reopen Brexit talks with the next British prime minister and stressed the “precious” Irish backstop must be defended. She said she still hoped the UK would remain in the European Union, while indicating she had no intention to renegotiate the withdrawal deal agreed by Theresa May and EU leaders. “I think it’s a good deal, but it is your responsibility and your noble task to sort this out,” she told a British Liberal Democrat MEP in the European parliament, in her first public comments on Brexit. In a thinly veiled message to the Tory leadership candidates Jeremy Hunt and Boris Johnson, Von der Leyen said the tone and attitude with which Brexit happens were crucial, adding: “Brexit is not the end of something, Brexit is the beginning of future relations and it’s of absolute importance that we have good cooperation.” She also made it clear she opposed attempts by both men to reopen discussions on the backstop, the fallback plan to avoid a hard border on the island of Ireland. “I think the backstop is of utmost importance and we absolutely know how crucial this nonexistent border is for you,” she said in response to an Irish MEP. “Having the backstop in the Brexit deal is precious, important and has to be defended.” Von der Leyen was addressing the European parliament’s liberal group as part of a round of meetings with large political groups to rally support ahead of a vote on her appointment next week. After being backed by EU leaders Von der Leyen needs at least 376 MEPs to elect her as commission president. The current German defence minister is a member of the centre-right European People’s party (EPP), so needs to win over some combination of socialists, liberals, greens or Eurosceptics. Von der Leyen, who would be the first woman to lead the EU executive, said she wanted an equal share of men and women as European commissioners. However, this depends on the EU’s member states appointing women to be their commissioners – an appeal many ignored in 2014. Brexit is scheduled for 31 October, the day before the new European commission takes office. Making her pitch to MEPs, Von der Leyen emphasised her green credentials while also arguing that the EU needed to be more assertive in the world – a traditional preoccupation of the centrist group. Her earlier meetings with the EPP, Eurosceptic group and socialists were not broadcast online. She pledged her full commitment to making the bloc climate neutral by 2050, saying this required tougher targets for 2030 as well as EU funds for countries that would otherwise struggle to make the green transition. Poland, the Czech Republic and Hungary recently blocked an EU declaration for a net-zero carbon emissions target by 2050, and are angling for more money before signing up to any pledge. Speaking in a mix of English, French and German, Von der Leyen emphasised her European outlook, reminding MEPs she was born in Brussels and attended the city’s European school with Dutch, German and French classmates. “That was my first impression of Europe,” she said. She clarified her views on European defence, restating that national parliaments should continue to have the final say on sending men and women into dangerous situations. “I prefer to speak about the army of the Europeans, not the European army,” she said, citing as a model the existing cooperation between Dutch and German forces. Although it is expected Von der Leyen will be approved by the European parliament, she still faced sniping over the process of her appointment whereby she leapfrogged politicians who had declared bids to lead the commission before European elections. The Dutch MEP Sophie in ‘t Veld asked whether she would be tougher in acting against violations of the rule of law and democracy than the outgoing commission, adding it was “remarkable” that Poland and Hungary had supported Von der Leyen’s nomination. Von der Leyen answered “yes” and pointed out her appointment was backed by all countries, although Angela Merkel, the German chancellor, did not vote for her because of divisions in Germany’s ruling coalition. In her opening remarks Von der Leyen said the rule of law was “the jewel in the crown of our work” and that the EU needed a mechanism for upholding it in member states.
Juncker said to have told new PM current agreement is the best and only one possible   Brussels has roundly rebuffed Boris Johnson after he laid down tough conditions for the new Brexit deal he hopes to strike over the summer. Speaking to the House of Commons for the first time as prime minister on Thursday, Johnson reiterated his campaign pledge of ditching the Irish backstop and promised to ramp up preparations for a no-deal Brexit immediately. “I would prefer us to leave the EU with a deal,” he said. “I would much prefer it. I believe that it is possible even at this late stage, and I will work flat-out to make it happen. “But certain things need to be clear: the withdrawal agreement negotiated by my predecessor has been three times rejected by this house; its terms are unacceptable to this parliament and to this country.” In a phone call later in the day, the European commission president, Jean-Claude Juncker, signalled the EU27’s determination to stick with the deal negotiated with Theresa May’s government – which includes the backstop. “President Juncker listened to what Prime Minister Johnson had to say, reiterating the EU’s position that the withdrawal agreement is the best and only agreement possible – in line with the European council guidelines,” a commission spokesperson said. Juncker told Johnson the EU was willing to “add language” to the political declaration – the non-binding document that covers the future relationship – but would only consider any other proposals “providing they are compatible with the withdrawal agreement”. The spokesperson added that the two men had swapped mobile numbers. Earlier, Johnson outlined to a noisy Commons his vision of a post-Brexit UK in 2050 as “the greatest and most prosperous economy in Europe at the centre of a new network of trade deals”. In a speech that was loudly cheered by many Conservative MPs, he said all members of his new cabinet were committed to leaving the EU on 31 October “whatever the circumstances – and to do otherwise would cause a catastrophic loss of confidence in our political system”. He also said he would ramp up no-deal preparations, which his official spokesman later confirmed was likely to include additional spending, and a significant public information campaign. Michael Gove will coordinate no-deal planning across the government. The Irish government expressed concern at Johnson’s approach to Brexit as tension began to mount over the increased risk of no deal. Michael Creed, Ireland’s agriculture minister, described the new government’s stance, and the composition of Johnson’s top team, as “alarming”. “The makeup of this government seems to be a mirror image of [Johnson’s] own viewpoint substantially and obviously that would be of concern to us,” he told RTÉ radio. “What the [Irish] government is concerned about now is the approach of new administration in the UK to the withdrawal agreement,” he said, adding: “Obviously what we are hearing from the [UK] government is quite alarming.” The following people are in Boris Johnson's first cabinet: Sajid Javid, chancellorDominic Raab, foreign secretaryPriti Patel, home secretaryMichael Gove, chancellor of the Duchy of LancasterRobert Buckland QC, lord chancellor and justice secretaryStephen Barclay, Brexit secretaryBen Wallace, defence secretaryMatthew Hancock, health secretaryAndrea Leadsom, business secretaryLiz Truss, international trade secretaryAmber Rudd, work and pensions secretaryGavin Williamson, education secretaryTheresa Villiers, environment secretaryRobert Jenrick, housing secretaryGrant Shapps, transport secretaryJulian Smith, Northern Ireland secretaryAlister Jack, Scotland secretaryAlun Cairns, Wales secretaryBaroness Evans, leader of the House of LordsNicky Morgan, DCMS secretaryAlok Sharma, international development secretaryJames Cleverly, party chair and minister without portfolio These people also attend full cabinet meetings: Rishi Sunak, chief secretary to the TreasuryJacob Rees-Mogg, leader of the House of CommonsMark Spencer, chief whipGeoffrey Cox QC, attorney generalKwasai Kwarteng, energy ministerOliver Dowden, paymaster general and minister for the Cabinet OfficeJake Berry, minister of state at the Cabinet OfficeEsther McVey, housing ministerJo Johnson, universities ministerBrandon Lewis, security minister In Brussels, meanwhile, Michel Barnier warned that such “combative” rhetoric was an attempt to crack the EU’s unity. In a note sent to diplomats, the bloc’s chief negotiator counselled the EU27 to stick to its principles in the face of the prime minister’s no-deal threats. “PM Johnson has stated that if an agreement is to be reached it goes by way of eliminating the backstop. This is of course unacceptable and not within the mandate of the European council,” he warned. In comments that signalled the growing belief in Brussels that the UK is heading towards a general election, Barnier wrote: “I note also the many strong reactions to the speech in the House of Commons. In this context we must follow carefully the further political and economic reactions and developments in the UK following this speech. “In any case, what remains essential on our side is to remain calm, stick to our principles and guidelines and show solidarity and unity of the 27.” Many MPs on both sides of the House of Commons believe Johnson’s bid to negotiate a new Brexit deal are merely the prelude to a general election, given the high bar he has set for success and the Tories’ slim majority. Johnson is announcing that the recruitment of 20,000 additional police officers will start within weeks – an eye-catching promise first made during his leadership campaign, that could sit comfortably in a Tory manifesto. “As I said on the steps of Downing Street this week, my job as prime minister is to make our streets safer. People want to see more officers in their neighbourhoods, protecting the public and cutting crime,” he said. Increasing the number of officers by 20,000 will only partially reverse the deep cuts made since 2010. The new government is also announcing the creation of a new “national policing board”, chaired by the home secretary, Priti Patel, in what she described as “the start of a new relationship between the government and the police”. Other election-ready pledges made in Johnson’s first 48 hours in Downing Street included upgrading 20 hospitals, fixing the broken social care system, cutting GP waiting times and rolling out full-fibre broadband across the country. The presence of the Vote Leave campaign mastermind Dominic Cummings in No 10 has also fuelled speculation about an autumn poll. Cost: £9bn. Only 12% of people in the UK earn more than £50,000 a year, so this pledge to move the 40% threshold up to £80,000 would help those on the highest incomes. Cost: £11bn. At present people pay NICs when they earn £166 a week and income tax when they earn £12,500 a year. Johnson wants to gradually align the two systems by raising the NICs ceiling to an annual £12,500. Cost: £4.6bn. Theresa May’s successor says he will raise education spending to £5,000 for every secondary school pupil and £4,000 for each primary school pupil. Cost: £1.1bn. Johnson has promised an extra 20,000 officers. Cost: £250m. This would reverse the BBC - and George Osborne's -decisions over this perk for pensioners. Cost: £3.8bn. There have been reports that the incoming prime minister would like all house sales under £500,000 in England, Wales and Northern Ireland to be exempt from stamp duty. Cost: unknown. Industry experts say this is not feasible in the time available, given coverage is currently less than 10%. Cost: unknown. Johnson said while on the hustings with Jeremy Hunt that he intended to create “about six” free ports – zones designated by the government to pay little or no tax in an attempt to boost economic activity. Cost: unknown. One of Johnson’s big early decisions will be whether to scrap HS2 and spend the money on alternative rail infrastructure such as linking the big cities of the north through HS3. Any savings generated by scrapping HS2 will almost certainly be recycled into other transport projects. Cost: unknown. The government employs one in six of the people working in the UK, so it would be affected by Johnson’s promise to raise the national living wage. Larry Elliott Economics editor Johnson will make a series of campaign-style visits in the coming days – including to Scotland, where the Conservative leader, Ruth Davidson, has expressed some concerns about his approach. Outlining his Brexit stance to MPs on Thursday, Johnson said he was ready to “negotiate in good faith” to find an alternative to the Irish backstop. “I do not accept the argument that says that these issues can only be solved by all or part of the UK remaining in the customs union or in the single market,” he said. “The evidence is that other arrangements are perfectly possible, and are also perfectly compatible with the Belfast or Good Friday agreement, to which we are of course steadfastly committed.” Challenged by Labour’s Hilary Benn about comments from the Irish prime minister, Leo Varadkar, ruling out a new withdrawal agreement, Johnson said the question was “redolent of the kind of defeatism and negativity that we’ve had over the last three years”. “Why begin by assuming that our EU friends will not wish to compromise?” he asked. Similarly, when another Labour backbencher, Yvette Cooper, asked Johnson about what practical solutions could be used for the Irish border in the absence of a trade deal or backstop, he replied that there were “abundant facilitations already available”.
Exclusive: extra time could be used for renegotiation but will be billed as chance for no-deal planning   Brussels is preparing to offer Boris Johnson a no-deal Brexit extension beyond 31 October in an attempt to help him keep the Conservative party together and provide one more chance to strike an agreement deal. The extra period of EU membership would be used for renegotiation but could be billed to Conservative Brexiters as an opportunity to prepare further for leaving without a deal. “It will be described as a technical delay to save Boris from political embarrassment but then we will have time to find an agreement,” said one senior EU diplomat. There is growing confidence among key member states that a no-deal Brexit can be avoided after the Commons voted this week to prevent the next prime minister, likely to be Johnson, from proroguing parliament. The details of the approach shared with the Guardian will aggravate hard Brexiters in Westminster who will see it as a serious threat to their expectations that the UK should depart on 31 October at any cost. Under the proposal discussed in Brussels, Johnson could maintain that he is on course to leave without an agreement while keeping open the option of coming to a deal with the bloc. EU leaders are also considering the steps they would take to avoid a crisis in the event that Johnson does press ahead with no deal on 31 October. A declaration has been mooted expressing the EU27’s regret at the lack of a deal and offering to re-engage if the UK accepts its financial commitments. “How do we build back out of the abyss in a time where minds on both sides of the channel are probably not very consolatory?” a second diplomat said. “We need to pre-empt that moment and create a platform for re-engagement on the day the UK leaves which might be used once the dust has settled. Provided of course the existing obligations are settled.” If Johnson is elected as Conservative leader next Tuesday and becomes prime minister, he is expected to visit key EU capitals in early August. A G7 meeting in Biarritz at the end of next month is regarded as an important stepping stone to finding a mutually advantageous way forward. An emergency Brexit summit could be held in September. But the events this week have left key EU diplomats and officials convinced that no deal is now significantly less likely. Philip Hammond signalled in an interview on Friday that he was prepared to vote to bring down a Johnson government should he push for no deal. The chancellor said it was “absolutely necessary” for the UK to extend its EU membership beyond 31 October. Asked whether he would rule out voting in favour of a no-confidence motion against Johnson, he told Le Monde and Süddeutsche Zeitung: “I will take steps to avoid an exit without agreement apart from an explicit parliamentary approval. There should be a new and sincere attempt to reach a consensus. If we do not find a solution with the members, we may have to ask the British to give their opinion again in one form or another.” Asked again to rule out supporting a motion of no confidence, Hammond responded: “I do not exclude anything for the moment.” This week the European commission president-designate, Ursula von der Leyen, said she was open to a further Brexit extension. The French president, Emmanuel Macron, has been consistently tough on the issue and would be likely to question whether the UK’s continued membership with Johnson in Downing Street would serve the EU well, but Berlin remains determined to avoid the economic damage of Britain crashing out. On Friday Angela Merkel said the withdrawal agreement struck by Theresa May would not be revised but it remained possible to redraft the political declaration in such a way that the Irish backstop would be defunct. “The withdrawal agreement is the withdrawal agreement,” Merkel told a news conference. “But the moment that a solution for the management of the border is found in [the declaration on] the future relationship … which basically squares the circle – on the one hand no physical border but on the other hand the EU single market ends – then the backstop will be overwritten, so to speak.” Merkel added: “This means the task is to draft future relations that way and perhaps to draft them more specifically and better and more precisely than so far.” Senior EU sources said discussions had been held on how to manage the 24 hours before a no-deal Brexit should it happen. The belief voiced in Paris that the UK would react to the economic shock by urgently seeking to reopen talks is not shared by a number of member states that would be most directly affected by a no-deal departure. “There is the worry among some that a kind of wartime spirit will take over, but we have to put out a hand to Britain,” said one EU diplomat. On Friday Alberto Costa, a Conservative MP who is fighting to secure post-Brexit rights for EU citizens in the UK and UK citizens in the EU, led a delegation to meet the EU’s chief negotiator, Michel Barnier. Costa said: “He made very clear that the European commission has at its very top of the political agenda the protection of citizens’ rights and it will continue to do everything it can to protect the rights of those 5 million citizens even in the absence of a withdrawal agreement.”
PM says keeping £39bn is not threat but ‘reality’ before meeting with Donald Tusk   Boris Johnson has said the £39bn Brexit divorce bill would not “strictly speaking” be owed to Brussels in full in the event of no deal, insisting: “It’s not a threat. It’s a reality.” Speaking to broadcasters as he prepared to meet the European council president, Donald Tusk, at the G7 summit in Biarritz, Johnson said: “If we come out without an agreement it is certainly true that the £39bn is no longer, strictly speaking, owed.” He told ITV: “There will be very substantial sums available to our country to spend on our priorities. It’s not a threat. It’s a simple fact of reality.” His intervention came after Tusk warned Johnson against going down in history as “Mr No Deal”. During the Conservative leadership campaign, Johnson suggested the entire £39bn would be retained in the hope of using it as leverage to win a better future trading relationship from the EU27, saying: “Money is a great solvent and a great lubricant.” But Downing Street appears to have conceded that legal obligations for past liabilities may mean up to a quarter of it may still have to be paid. The remarks on the divorce bill are likely to infuriate Britain’s EU27 counterparts, who are still awaiting detailed proposals from London about how to maintain a soft border in Ireland after Brexit. However, Johnson claimed the chances of renegotiating Britain’s exit had improved after his trips to Berlin and Paris. “In the last few days there has been a change of mood in the EU,” he said. Asked whether negotiations should resume in Brussels – something he hopes Tusk will approve – Johnson said: “It is sensible now to get going and we will get going.” In a separate interview with the BBC, he said it was “touch and go” whether a deal could be reached in time, however – and he sought to lay the blame at the door of the EU27 if the outcome was ultimately a no-deal Brexit. “It all depends on our EU friends and partners. I think in the last few days there has been a dawning realisation in Brussels and other European capitals what the shape of the problem is for the UK,” he said. During his media round, Johnson also compared the challenge of Brexit to a rock he had encountered on his morning swim in the sea at the French Atlantic resort. “I swam round that rock this morning. From here you cannot tell there is a gigantic hole in that rock. There is a way through,” he said. “My point to the EU is that there is a way through, but you can’t find the way through if you just sit on the beach.” The prime minister also reiterated that the withdrawal agreement, containing what he has repeatedly referred to as the “undemocratic” backstop, must be scrapped, because it could not pass through parliament. Johnson voted for the deal himself at the third time of asking earlier this year, as did several other prominent Brexiters, including the former Brexit secretary David Davis. The prime minister is widely believed at Westminster to be drawing up plans for an early general election, in order to frustrate efforts to tie his hands on Brexit.
  Schools may have to close, exams could be disrupted and fresh food for pupils’ meals could run short because of panic buying with prices soaring by up to 20%, according to a secret Department for Education analysis of the risks of a no-deal Brexit obtained by the Observer. The five-page document – marked “Official Sensitive” and with the instruction “Do Not Circulate” – also raises the possibility of teacher absences caused by travel disruption, citing schools in Kent as particularly at risk. On the dangers of food shortages to schools, it suggests that informing the public of the risks could make matters even worse. In a section entitled School Food, it talks of the “risk that communications in this area could spark undue alarm or panic food buying among the general public”. And it adds: “Warehousing and stockpiling capacity will be more limited in the pre-Xmas period. The department has limited levers to address these risks. We are heavily dependent on the actions of major suppliers and other government departments to ensure continued provision.” Listing the actions the department would take in the event of food shortages affecting schools, the document says: “In light of any food shortages or price increases we will communicate how schools can interpret the food menu standards flexibly. DfE may make exceptional payments – or submit a prepared bid to HM Treasury for additional funding. Worst case scenario estimate of the increased costs – £40 to £85m a year for schools in relation to free school meal provision based on price increases of 10-20%.” Under a heading School Travel, the analysis makes clear that the potential problems are “not countrywide”, and cites Dover in Kent as at the highest risk of disruption, stating: “Risk of travel disruption could result in school and early years settings closures, pupil and staff absence and exam disruption (though to a lesser extent in Oct due to limited exams being sat).” Entitled “DfE No Deal Programme – Schools”, the document was drawn up by Lord Agnew, reappointed by Boris Johnson as parliamentary under-secretary for schools last week. It appears to have been written very recently as it refers to “short lead in time due to new PM” . The leak was seized on last night by the Labour party. Shadow education secretary Angela Rayner called on Johnson to rule out a no-deal Brexit, which she said would pile more misery on a school system that had already suffered from years of Tory austerity cuts. “This document lays bare the potential consequences of a disastrous no-deal Brexit for our schools and nurseries, and the parents and children who rely on them. By the government’s own admission, head teachers may be left unable to feed their pupils or forced to close their doors entirely. “With our education system already at breaking point after years of Tory budget cuts, being forced to prepare for this kind of chaos is the last thing that schools and nurseries need. Boris Johnson must abandon his irresponsible and expensive obsession with no deal,” she said. The analysis ranks the level of risks under a colour-coded system: green (where the department is confident the risks can be dealt with and delivery of services maintained as normal); amber (where delivery is “feasible but significant issues already exist requiring management attention”); and red (where delivery of normal services “appears to be undeliverable”). The issues relating to school food and travel disruption that could lead to school closures and exam disruption are given amber warnings. The document mentions a risk of shortages of medical supplies and equipment, particularly to special educational needs schools, but classifies the risk as green. With Johnson insisting he will take the UK out of the EU “deal or no deal” on 31 October, the government announced plans last week to set aside an extra £2.1bn for no-deal preparations, including stockpiling of medicines, an extra 500 border officials and a public awareness campaign about possible disruption to travel and services. The prime minister is ramping up preparations for a no-deal Brexit, although he insists he still wants to leave the EU with a new agreement. A DfE spokesperson said: “While we don’t comment on leaked documents, our … guidance to schools and other stakeholders already provides advice on EU exit preparations for schools, including food provision, medical supplies and guidance for EU nationals. We are confident provision for schools will be protected in the event of the UK having to leave the EU without an agreement and there are robust contingency plans in place to ensure schools are prepared in all eventualities.” Ian Watts, area education officer at Kent county council, said: “We have a duty to families to ensure schools do all they can to ensure provision, even in times of emergency.” Other government documents obtained by Sky News last week warned of “consumer panic” and gaps in security within weeks of leaving the EU without a deal.
Public advertising campaign said to be country’s biggest ever urges Britons to visit website   The billboards have been unveiled, the branded mugs have been ordered and the adverts will soon start following you around the internet after the government launched what it claimed to be the largest ever public information campaign in an effort to prepare the British public for leaving the EU. The Get Ready for Brexit campaign went live on Sunday, stating that the UK would be leaving the EU on 31 October and urging the public to visit a new website to check what they needed to do to prepare for a no-deal exit. The slogan appeared for the first time on a giant advertising screen next to a John Lewis store at the Westfield shopping centre in Stratford, east London, looming over visitors. Downing Street has previously briefed that the taxpayer-funded advertising campaign will cost up to £100m, although doubts have been raised over whether the government will realistically be able to spend that much on a campaign lasting just two months. One leading advertising industry source pointed out that this figure was substantially higher than the amount spent on traditional advertising in the UK by major consumer brands such as Amazon, Tesco and Asda in the whole of 2018. This suggests that either the government is overstating the amount it intends to spend in an attempt to draw extra attention or that Downing Street really is launching an advertising campaign that will be unequalled in its ubiquity. Michael Gove, the cabinet minister in charge of no-deal planning, said: “Ensuring an orderly Brexit is not only a matter of national importance, but a shared responsibility” as he launched the adverts by referring to government polling that showed only 50% of the population thought it was likely the UK would leave the EU on 31 October. The same research found that 42% of small- to medium-sized businesses were still unsure of how they could prepare for Brexit and just a third of the British public have looked for information on what they will need to do, suggesting large-scale ignorance of what Brexit will involve with less than two months to go until the expected departure date. The Get Ready campaign, which shares its name with a song by the Temptations and an album by New Order, is likely to incorporate television, radio, newspaper and online adverts. Roadshows are expected to take place across the country, and online video tutorials are promised. According to the Times, a substantial order has been placed for branded mugs and T-shirts and there were claims that the government briefly considered reusing the Vote Leave slogan “take back control” on the official campaign. Theresa May’s administration spent relatively small amounts, measured in the hundreds of thousands of pounds, on publicly funded advertising campaigns supporting her abandoned withdrawal agreement in the run-up to the original Brexit deadline in March. Pro-Europe campaign groups have suggested the Get Ready campaign might not conform with government communications guidelines that ban adverts which could be construed as party political. Best for Britain’s chairman, Lord Malloch-Brown, claimed the campaign could be seen as using public money to support a potential Conservative general election campaign. He said it was factually inaccurate to claim the UK was ready for a no-deal departure from the EU. “The argument that the government is ready for Brexit may be one of the defining issues for a general election campaign,” said the pro-EU campaigner in his letter to cabinet secretary Mark Sedwill. “If the government’s campaign starts before 31 October, then government advertising that makes this claim will effectively be supporting the governing party’s re-election campaign.” However, pro-Brexit campaigners have already drawn comparison with the millions spent on leaflets delivered to every house in the UK during the 2016 EU referendum by David Cameron’s government in support of the remain campaign. This is not the first public information campaign called Get Ready for Brexit. Dutch port operators launched a website with the same name in January, suggesting foreign countries may have been doing their best to educate businesses on the risks of a disorderly Brexit for longer than the UK government.
French president tells Boris Johnson he must present concrete proposals for UK exit   Emmanuel Macron has described the Irish backstop as “indispensable” to a Brexit deal and urged Boris Johnson to set out his proposed alternatives as soon as possible, as he met the British prime minister in Paris. The French president told Johnson on Thursday that the EU would like “visibility” on London’s concrete proposals for the UK’s withdrawal from the EU within a month, echoing language used by the German chancellor, Angela Merkel, on Wednesday.  Macron said he stood united with Merkel that the clock was ticking and that it was not possible to wait until the last minute to find a solution. He said the EU’s chief negotiator, Michel Barnier, could be involved in finding an answer “without totally reshuffling the withdrawal agreement”. “We should all together be able to find something smart within 30 days if there is goodwill on both sides,” Macron said. “We need to try to have a useful month.”  Variously described as an insurance policy or safety net, the backstop is a device in the withdrawal agreement intended to ensure that there will not be a hard border between Northern Ireland and the Republic of Ireland, even if no formal deal can be reached on trade and security arrangements. It would mean that if there were no workable agreement on such matters, Northern Ireland would stay in the customs union and much of the single market, guaranteeing a friction-free border with the Republic. This would keep the Good Friday agreement intact. Both the UK and EU signed up to the basic idea in December 2017 as part of the initial Brexit deal, but there have been disagreements since on how it would work. The DUP have objected to it, as it potentially treats Northern Ireland differently from the rest of the UK, creating a customs divide in the Irish Sea, which is anathema to the unionist party. Hardline Tory Eurosceptics also object to it, as they perceive it to be a trap that could potentially lock the UK into the EU’s customs union permanently if the UK & EU cannot seal a free trade agreement. That would prevent the UK from doing its own free trade deals with nations outside the bloc.  Joint interpretative instrument  A legal add-on to the withdrawal agreement was given to Theresa May in January 2019 to try to get her deal through the UK parliament. It gives legal force to a letter from Jean-Claude Juncker and Donald Tusk, the presidents of the commission and council. This stated the EU’s intention to negotiate an alternative to the backstop so it would not be triggered, or, if it was triggered, to get out of it as quickly as possible. Unilateral statement from the UK  This set out the British position that, if the backstop were to become permanent and talks on an alternative were going nowhere, the UK believes it would be able to exit the arrangement. Additional language in political declaration  This emphasises the urgency felt on both sides to negotiate an alternative to the backstop, and flesh out what a technological fix would look like. However, it failed to persuade the attorney general, Geoffrey Cox, who said that while it ‘reduces the risk’ of the UK being trapped in a backstop indefinitely, it does not remove it. Boris Johnson declared the Northern Ireland backstop ‘dead’ during his leadership campaign, and promised to throw it out of any deal he renegotiated with the EU. The EU has repeatedly stated that it will not reopen the withdrawal agreement for renegotiation.  Daniel Boffey, Martin Belam and Peter Walker  Merkel insisted on Thursday that she had not given the UK a strict 30-day deadline, but instead wanted to highlight how short time was before the UK’s planned exit date of 31 October. Any new proposals to deal with the issue of the Northern Ireland border should fit into the existing framework withdrawal agreement already negotiated, Macron said. Johnson has repeatedly said the backstop – an insurance plan to avoid a hard border on the island of Ireland – must go in order to avoid a no-deal exit. He argues it could leave the UK tied to the EU indefinitely. But Macron said the backstop was both an indispensable guarantee for the stability of Ireland and a means of protecting the integrity of the European single market, and that any new UK ideas had to respect that. Johnson arrived at the Élysée Palace in a Range Rover decorated with UK flags. Macron is keenly aware of the prime minister’s long track record of French-bashing for a domestic audience, but both men were at pains to show their close working relationship. Johnson repeatedly called Macron “Emmanuel” and smiled at him, only shrugging and grimacing slightly and reaching into his jacket for a pen to amend his speech as he stood listening to Macron say the Irish backstop was an “essential guarantee”. An official in Macron’s office said the talks were constructive. At a joint news conference on Wednesday in Berlin with Johnson, Merkel appeared to suggest that a solution to the sticking point of the Irish backstop could be found in the next 30 days. But on Thursday she said: “It is not about 30 days. The 30 days were meant as an example to highlight the fact that we need to achieve it in a short time.” Macron was careful to say that if no concrete solution based on the current withdrawal agreement were found in the coming month, it would be the UK’s sole responsibility. “It would mean that the problem is deeper, more political – a British political problem.” At that point “there will be a political choice to be made by the prime minister, it won’t fall to us”. Macron appeared to have the upper hand as he smiled warmly while telling Johnson: “On Brexit my position is clear and I know how much that occupies your days and your nights.” This appeared to be a reference to Downing Street rushing to respond on Wednesday night to Macron’s comments to reporters in Paris that Johnson’s written request to renegotiate the UK’s exit and scrap the backstop was “not an option”. Macron was even more tactile than usual with a foreign leader, repeatedly patting Johnson on the back and shoulder. “I’ve always been portrayed as the toughest in the group,” Macron grinned. Political commentators in France suspect Johnson of wanting to frame France as the bad cop to blame for any no deal. Macron is determined to avoid taking any blame for what he calls the UK’s internal political crisis over Brexit. Macron said he believed the British people’s sovereign decision must be carried out, warning against “democracies suffering lack of efficiency and lack of clarity”. He reminded Johnson that he stood firmly together with Merkel in a united position and that it was not up to any one single EU member state to negotiate. Johnson tried to strike a positive note, saying that he admired the “can-do spirit” expressed by Merkel in Berlin on Wednesday. He said: “Let’s get Brexit done, let’s get it done sensibly and pragmatically and in the interests of both sides and let’s not wait until 31 October. Let’s get on now in deepening and intensifying the friendship and partnership between us. “When you look at the border with Northern Ireland ... under no circumstances will the UK government be instituting, imposing checks or controls of any kind at that border. We think there are ways of protecting the integrity of the single market and allowing the UK to exit from the EU, all and entire and perfect as it were.” At 11pm UK time on 31 October the UK would, by default, become a “third country” in terms of relations with the EU, with no overarching post-Brexit plan in place and no transition period. The UK would no longer be paying into the EU budget, nor would it hand over the £39bn divorce payment. The UK would drop out of countless arrangements, pacts and treaties, covering everything from tariffs to the movement of people, foodstuffs, other goods and data, to numerous specific deals on things such as aviation, and policing and security. Without an overall withdrawal agreement each element would need to be agreed. In the immediate aftermath, without a deal the UK would trade with the EU on the default terms of the World Trade Organization (WTO), including tariffs on agricultural goods. The UK government has already indicated that it will set low or no tariffs on goods coming into the country. This would lower the price of imports – making it harder for British manufacturers to compete with foreign goods. If the UK sets the tariffs to zero on goods coming in from the EU, under WTO “most favoured nation” rules it must also offer the same zero tariffs to other countries. WTO rules only cover goods – they do not apply to financial services, a significant part of the UK’s economy. Trading under WTO rules will also require border checks, which could cause delays at ports, and a severe challenge to the peace process in Ireland without alternative arrangements in place to avoid a hard border. Some no-deal supporters have claimed that the UK can use article 24 of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (Gatt) to force the EU to accept a period of up to 10 years where there are no tariffs while a free trade agreement is negotiated. However, the UK cannot invoke article 24 unilaterally – the EU would have to agree to it. In previous cases where the article has been used, the two sides had a deal in place, and it has never been used to replicate something of the scale and complexity of the EU and the UK’s trading relationship. The director general of the WTO, Roberto Azevêdo, has told Prospect magazine that “in simple factual terms in this scenario, you could expect to see the application of tariffs between the UK and EU where currently there are none”. Until some agreements are in place, a no-deal scenario will place extra overheads on UK businesses – eg the current government advice is that all drivers, including lorries and commercial vehicles, will require extra documentation to be able to drive in Europe after 31 October if there is no deal. Those arguing for a “managed” no deal envisage that a range of smaller, sector-by-sector, bilateral agreements could be quickly put into place as mutual self-interest between the UK and EU to avoid introducing or to rapidly remove this kind of bureaucracy. Martin Belam Johnson added that “technical solutions” were “readily available” to avoid checkpoints, but did not spell out his clear alternative to a backstop guarantee. The prime minister is due to meet the European council president, Donald Tusk, at the G7 summit this weekend, their first encounter since Johnson took over, an event that was greeted by a frosty two-line letter of congratulations from the EU leader. Tusk, who will be representing the EU at the G7, previously said there was “a special place in hell” for those who promoted Brexit “without even a sketch of a plan” – remarks seen as being aimed at Johnson, a figurehead of the leave campaign. Tusk will be “in listening mode in Biarritz” and the EU is “looking forward to new facts and new workable ideas”, a senior EU official said. But hopes of a breakthrough are low, with both sides emphasising that the bilateral meeting will also address the global economy and foreign policy questions. No deal has become the default scenario for EU officials, since Johnson wrote to Tusk on Monday calling on the EU to scrap the backstop, the insurance plan to avoid a hard border on the island of Ireland.  Since that letter and Johnson’s statements that he believes a no deal could take place, “the EU and our member states need to take that possibility of a no-deal outcome much more seriously than before”, a senior EU official said. “I know that this [no deal] is the working assumption. Because we are responsible people, we have to prepare ourselves for that, the worst possible outcome – but still likely – if you listen to the declarations of Prime Minister Johnson.”
PM said EU leaders would be blamed for their ‘obduracy’ and that UK could keep much of £39bn settlement   Britain could “easily cope” with a no-deal Brexit, which would be the fault of EU leaders’ “obduracy”, Boris Johnson claimed at the summit of G7 countries in France, as he continued to resist mounting pressure to spell out his own plans for breaking the deadlock. “I think we can get through this, this is a great, great country, the UK, we can easily cope with a no-deal scenario,” Johnson insisted in Biarritz, as he made his debut on the international stage as prime minister with a series of bilateral meetings with world leaders including Donald Trump, the EU council president, Donald Tusk, and the Indian prime minister, Narendra Modi. Johnson said preparations for no deal were being ramped up to help secure an agreement, but also “so that if and when we are forced by the obduracy by our European friends to come out on 31 October without a deal that things are as smooth as they can possibly be”. Johnson claimed food shortages – one of the risks outlined in the leaked Operation Yellowhammer documents on no-deal planning – were “highly unlikely”, and offered a “guarantee” that patients would be able to access medicines unhindered. The prime minister said that in the event of no deal the UK would withhold much of the £39bn financial settlement agreed by Theresa May – and insisted it was up to the EU27 to avert that eventuality. “If we come out without an agreement it is certainly true that the £39bn is no longer, strictly speaking, owed,” he said. “There will be very substantial sums available to our country to spend on our priorities. It’s not a threat. It’s a simple fact of reality.” During the Conservative leadership campaign, Johnson suggested the entire £39bn would be retained in the hope of using it as leverage to win a better future trading relationship from the EU27. But Downing Street appears to have conceded that legal obligations for past liabilities may mean up to a quarter of it may still have to be paid. Johnson is battling to keep alive the prospect of striking a reworked exit deal with the EU27 in time for Britain to leave by the Halloween deadline, which he has made it a “mission” of his government to meet. But with just a week until MPs return to Westminster, preparing to seize any opportunity to bind his hands, Johnson has so far presented no detailed plan. After Johnson met Tusk on the sidelines of the G7 summit on Sunday, an EU official said, “nothing really happened”. “It was essentially just a reconfirmation of of the views of both sides. There were no new substantive elements from any side, and obviously not from the UK side,” the official said. “What we ideally would have been hoping for and looking for are new ideas that unblock this situation,” the European official said. “So we are waiting … We need input from their side.” Meanwhile, it emerged this weekend that Downing Street has sought legal advice from the attorney general, Geoffrey Cox, about the possibility of shutting down parliament from September. Asked about the issue on Sunday, a senior government official said, “No 10 commissions legal advice on a whole range of issues, but the PM is clear that he is not going to stop MPs debating Brexit”. Johnson’s parliamentary opponents appear unable to present a united front, however. The shadow trade secretary, Barry Gardiner, accused the Liberal Democrat leader, Jo Swinson, of being “extremely petulant” on Sunday, after she raised doubts about whether Jeremy Corbyn was the right person to lead a caretaker government to prevent a no-deal Brexit. Gardiner told Sky News that the Labour leader was offering a “failsafe” way of achieving the Lib Dems’ Brexit aims, but he said Swinson had concluded, “oh well, we are not going to cooperate if Jeremy Corbyn is going to be the person who does it”. Labour has suggested it could table a vote of no confidence in Johnson’s government – but is unlikely to do so immediately after MPs return from summer recess unless it is convinced Tory rebels are ready to back it. Swinson has written to Corbyn, suggesting an agenda for the meeting and warning that if he insists on leading the charge it could prevent the plan succeeding. “In the last week, many MPs who stand opposed to no deal, in particular key Conservative MPs, have rejected your proposal to lead an emergency government. Insisting you lead that emergency government will therefore jeopardise the chances of a no confidence vote gaining enough support to pass in the first place,” she wrote. The former chancellor Philip Hammond revealed the extent of the bad blood between Downing Street and Conservative moderates on Sunday, as he wrote to the PM demanding an apology for briefings that suggested the Yellowhammer leak came from former ministers. Hammond said it had since emerged the document was dated to August, and thus could not have been leaked by one of the moderates dispatched to the backbenches in Johnson’s summer reshuffle. A government official said Johnson would respond, “in due course”. On Sunday, Johnson claimed the Brexit mood music had improved significantly over recent days; but it remained “touch and go” whether a deal was achievable. Throughout the summit in Biarritz, Johnson has sought to stress the UK’s determination to remain internationalist – and to distance itself from Trump’s White House on some questions. At a dinner of G7 leaders on Saturday night, which sources said was occasionally testy, Johnson sided with Germany, France and others against the US president’s argument that Russia should be readmitted to the group.
No-deal Brexit is British PM’s ‘central scenario’, chief Brussels envoy reportedly says   Boris Johnson has no intention of renegotiating the withdrawal agreement and a no-deal Brexit is his “central scenario”, European diplomats have been told, amid hardening evidence in Westminster that the government is expecting to crash out of the EU. Brussels diplomats briefed after a meeting between the prime minister’s chief envoy and senior EU figures in Brussels said that Britain’s refusal to compromise was understood to have been clear to those attending. Instead David Frost, the government’s new chief Europe adviser, is said to have sought discussions on how negotiations could be reset after the UK crashes out on 31 October. “It was clear UK does not have another plan,” a senior EU diplomat said of the meetings with Frost. “No intention to negotiate, which would require a plan. A no deal now appears to be the UK government’s central scenario.” The disclosure came as No 10 insisted the government was “ready to negotiate in good faith” but made clear that Johnson would only agree to a deal without what he refers to as the “undemocratic backstop” – the mechanism to prevent a hard border on the island of Ireland that could keep the UK in a customs union. The EU has repeatedly said the backstop is not up for negotiation. The UK’s failure to provide any proposals on how to deal with the controversial Irish backstop was felt to be significant by EU officials who spoke to the Guardian. Frost was said to have told the officials that a technological solution to the Irish border was the UK’s preferred option before admitting that “it would not be ready now for Brexit”. “Even if EU gave up the backstop there is no alternative,” a diplomat concluded of the discussion. “That message has now gone loud and clear to capitals, it was useful to hear it from horse’s mouth,” the EU source said. “Reality is sinking in.” With no new UK-EU talks scheduled, there were meanwhile signs in Westminster that Johnson’s government was readying itself for a no-deal Brexit and preparing to do battle with Tory MPs who have said they will join with opposition parties to prevent that outcome. The prime minister’s senior adviser, Dominic Cummings, instructed special advisers across the government to keep on top of preparations for a no deal Brexit early on Monday morning and attacked Philip Hammond, the former chancellor, for failing to get the country ready. Over the weekend, it became clear he believes that Johnson could simply refuse to resign in the event of losing a no-confidence motion and schedule an general election for November – after leaving the EU at the end of October. Johnson said on Monday that an election was the “last thing” he wanted. But his official spokesman stressed at his regular briefing for journalists that Brexit would take place on 31 October “whatever the circumstances”, even if parliament has voted against a no-deal departure or passed a confidence motion against the prime minister necessitating an election. Conservative rebels plotting against a no-deal Brexit are already considering how to thwart No 10, believing an alternative government could potentially be created with a majority to challenge Johnson if he loses a confidence vote. Corbyn indicated on Monday that he may be prepared to bring a no-confidence vote in the government very soon after parliament returns from its summer break in September. “We will do everything to stop no deal, including a no-confidence vote at the appropriate very early time to do it,” he said on a visit to flood-stricken Whaley Bridge in Derbyshire. “The prime minister seems to be trying to slip no deal through, slip past parliament and slip past the British people. “Sorry, no deal will be really serious. Serious for food prices, for medical supplies, for trade, for investment, and drive us straight into the hands of the sort of trade deal that Donald Trump wants to do with Boris Johnson. “I’m sorry, it’s not on, it’s not acceptable. We will do everything we can to block it.” Several Conservative MPs, including Hammond, have indicated they could vote with Labour to bring Johnson down if he is set on a no-deal Brexit. Friends of Hammond also hit back at Cummings on Monday, saying it was “simply untrue” that the Treasury had failed to prepare. “The bigger question is why is Dominic Cummings, the de facto deputy PM, so keen to spend yet more taxpayers’ money on something that his boss insists has only a one in a million chance of happening?” one Hammond ally said. EU officials increasingly believe the UK is heading for a no-deal exit after their meetings with Frost, who replaced Theresa May’s chief negotiator, Olly Robbins. Last week, Frost met Clara Martínez Alberola, the head of cabinet for the European commission president, Jean-Claude Juncker; Stéphanie Riso, a senior official in Michel Barnier’s negotiations taskforce, who was a key player in drafting the terms of the backstop, and Ilze Juhansone, the deputy secretary general at the commission. The demand over the weekend by the Brexit secretary, Stephen Barclay, that Barnier seek a new negotiating mandate from the EU’s leaders to allow fresh talks was seen as mere “noise”. Diplomats said the message was seen as “confrontational – unhelpful” but that more in that vein was expected at a meeting of the G7 in Biarritz, when Johnson will meet Juncker. A spokeswoman for the European commission said the impact of the UK crashing out would be proportionally heavier on the British side of the Channel. The spokeswoman added: “For a negotiation to be successful it takes two to tango. If the music and the rhythm is not right then … you have no dance. “But that doesn’t mean that it was a failure. I think both sides negotiated with the very best intentions and very best efforts. The outcome on the table is the best deal possible and I don’t think there is any fault or blame to be looked for in this.” A UK government spokesman said: “We are ready to negotiate in good faith an alternative to the anti-democratic backstop. “There is abundant scope to find the technological solutions necessary – and these solutions can and will be found, in the context of the free trade agreement that we will negotiate with the EU after 31 October.” The spokesman added: “The prime minister wants to meet EU leaders and negotiate a new deal – one that abolishes the anti-democratic backstop. “We will throw ourselves into the negotiations with the greatest energy and the spirit of friendship. The fact is the withdrawal agreement has been rejected by parliament three times and will not pass in its current form so – if the EU wants a deal – it needs to change its stance. Until then, we will continue to prepare to leave the EU on 31 October.”
Like the newspaper columnist he recently was, PM finds lessons for EU in his Atlantic Ocean plunge   Boris Johnson took the plunge into choppy waters – literally – early on Sunday morning, as he began his first international summit as prime minister, in the French seaside resort of Biarritz. Watched closely by French protection officers on boats and paddleboards, and accompanied at least some of the way by the UK’s ambassador to Paris, Ed Llewellyn, Johnson struck out from the beach and swam to a distant rock and back. Like a typical newspaper columnist, which he was until recently, Johnson later turned the experience into a colourful metaphor for Brexit. “From here you cannot tell there is a gigantic hole in that rock. There is a way through. My point to the EU is that there is a way through, but you can’t find the way through if you just sit on the beach.” After his dip, the prime minister headed for an equally bracing experience: breakfast with Donald Trump. The pair joshed and joked as they descended a curving staircase together in Biarritz’s Hôtel de Palais, with Johnson saying: “I’m hungry. Where’s the breakfast?” Trump then warmly introduced Johnson to the circle of waiting reporters. “Do you know who this is? Does everybody know?” Part of Johnson’s challenge as he reinvents himself as a (semi)-serious global statesman is that everyone does know who he is – and many of them came to a judgment about him long ago. And No 10’s last-minute decision to deny Channel 4 an interview with the prime minister, after its head of news called him a “known liar”, underlines Johnson’s sensitivity about his reputation. After taking questions from journalists, Johnson and Trump retired for an hour-long breakfast meeting with their respective delegations, at which the prospects for a trade deal were on the menu – alongside a string of foreign policy issues. As he landed in France a day earlier, Johnson had taken a tough anti-protectionist stance, urging the US to dial down trade tensions with China, and saying: “I want to see tariffs come off.” Once Trump was standing alongside him, his tone appeared somewhat less combative. “Look, I just want to say I congratulate the president on everything that the American economy is achieving. It’s fantastic to see that. But just to register the faint, sheeplike note of our view on the trade war, we’re in favour of trade peace on the whole, and dialling it down if we can.” There was considerably less bonhomie as Johnson met the second Donald of the day. Donald Tusk, the president of the European council, once said there was a “special place in hell” for those who had promoted Brexit without saying how it could be achieved – and had warned on Saturday that Johnson should avoid “going down in history as Mr No Deal”. On his part, Johnson warmed up for the meeting on Sunday by telling broadcasters on the picturesque seafront that the £39bn Brexit divorce bill would not “strictly speaking” be owed in the event of a no-deal Brexit. After the half-hour discussion, Downing Street sought to stress the non-Brexit issues the pair had agreed on, and the fact that they had confirmed they would meet again at the UN general assembly next month. That helps No 10 to keep alive the sense that a Brexit deal remains possible, which will be crucial when Johnson returns to the UK to navigate a treacherous fortnight in parliament. When EU diplomats gave their own assessment of the meeting later, they made clear Tusk felt little progress had been made – and like other EU leaders, he was still waiting for concrete proposals to emerge. But with one more day to go in Biarritz, the UK delegation will have been relieved that so far there have been no gaffes, spats or off-colour gags. As he seeks to burnish his reputation as a statesman, Johnson is flattered by the fact that the socially awkward Theresa May gave the air of barely tolerating the chitchat and bonhomie that oils events like these. By contrast, a senior UK official said: “I think we’ve seen lots of images of the PM actually enjoying himself.” When Johnson flies back to Downing Street on Monday, however, with speculation swirling about a snap election, and a rebel alliance massing against him, he faces much choppier waters ahead.
Leaving without a deal is not an event, it’s the start of a process – and Mark Carney is right not to predict its long-term impact   Predictions matter, not least because they feed directly into the political debate. We saw this all too clearly in 2016. And apocalyptic predictions matter even more when they don’t come true. The Treasury’s gloom-ridden short-term forecast in May 2016 of the impact of Brexit – not to mention its hysterical portrayal by the Treasury website – became the Brexiters’ best friend. And George Osborne’s promised “punishment budget” was rightly derided for being both bad economics and bad politics. Dire predictions of immediate job losses and indeed recession proved simply to be false. Even when the pound fell precipitately immediately after the referendum, it was easy for proponents of Brexit to point out that things were nowhere near as bad as some had predicted. The EU has put in place short-term measures. What we do not know is how long these measures will remain in place So it’s hardly surprising that when the governor of the Bank of England, Mark Carney, warns, as he did on the Today programme this morning, that a no-deal Brexit would cause an “instantaneous shock” to the UK economy, raising prices and reducing household incomes, proponents of no deal such as Iain Duncan Smith would claim he was “reviving project fear”.  And no surprise that the architect of universal credit thinks that when a complex project goes off track the best way to respond is to stick your fingers in your ears. Though it’s slightly more worrying when a supposedly serious newspaper calls for the UK’s independent central bank to stop getting us all down with “gloomy forecasts”.  But if the forecasts were wrong last time, why should we pay any attention to them this time? And what, realistically, can we actually know about the impact of no deal? Well, it’s worth noting that while the Treasury certainly got the Brexit vote very badly wrong, the medium-term impacts haven’t been that different from those projected by credible independent economists. The consensus is that, so far, we’ve lost perhaps 1.5-2% worth of growth and, with uncertainty taking an increasing toll on business confidence and hence investment, next week’s figures are likely to show growth grinding entirely to a halt. But that doesn’t mean we, or anyone else, know what the economic impact of no deal would actually be. Carney did make that absolutely clear, refusing to produce an economic forecast. There are two good reason to be cautious. First, while we know some of the consequences of no deal – customs controls, tariffs and new trade barriers – no one really knows how great the short-term disruption will be. Sky News has got hold of a leaked internal Whitehall slide describing the worst-case scenario for the first month of a no-deal Brexit. It talks of UK nationals in other EU states losing residency and other rights; of a risk of increased crime; of the potential for an immediate halting of cross-border agricultural trade on the island of Ireland, of currency and financial market volatility. You get the picture. But the Cabinet Office doesn’t produce documents like this simply to scare ministers. Its purpose is to put measures into place to mitigate the worst-case scenario. Even before the government ramped up its no-deal planning, much was already in place to ensure we don’t run out of drugs or essential chemicals. And on the other side of the channel, the EU has put in place unilateral short-term measures in areas such as aviation and freight transport to cushion the shock. What we do not know is how long these measures will remain in place. Second, we don’t know what the impact will be on consumer and business confidence. In 2016, the Treasury and others expected a big hit. As it turned out, the summer of 2016 saw nice weather, a World Cup and generally buoyant spending. Now, as then, we simply cannot be sure. And again, the government can act to mitigate the impacts by cutting taxes or increasing spending. What is important is not what happens on day one or week one after a no-deal exit, but how long it lasts and what happens next. Because no deal is not an event but the start of a process. In an optimistic scenario, the shock of no deal will bring both sides back to the table with strong incentives from domestic constituencies to find a way through. But sadly this seems far less plausible than a political downward spiral, with acrimony over money and the Irish border meaning negotiations go backwards before they can go forwards. And even when serious talking begins, the UK will be a third country. No article 50 and no withdrawal agreement means a lengthier and messier process. So there’s no point shooting the messenger. When Carney – or other economists – say no deal will damage the UK economy but that it’s hard, if not impossible, to say just how much, he’s not a “gloomster” but simply stating the obvious. And when he says that while the Bank (and the Treasury) can help cushion the immediate impacts but sorting out the mess afterwards will be up to the politicians, he’s not passing the buck but making clear that if politicians take us down that road, they will bear a heavy responsibility. • Anand Menon is director of UK in a Changing Europe. Jonathan Portes is a senior fellow at UK in a Changing Europe
Hastily convened group plans to force PM to seek article 50 extension if no deal is reached   Rebel MPs from across the political spectrum are gearing up for a historic parliamentary clash next week, after Boris Johnson announced plans to suspend parliament for a critical five-week period in the run-up to Brexit. Conservative and opposition MPs took part in a series of hastily convened conference calls on Wednesday in a last-ditch effort to prevent a no-deal outcome, after the prime minister confirmed he had obtained permission from the Queen to prorogue parliament. The surprise decision provoked widespread fury, with Commons Speaker John Bercow describing it as a “constitutional outrage”. Robert Kerslake, the former head of the civil service, said Whitehall would have to think carefully about whether to put ministers’ instructions into effect. “We are reaching the point where the civil service must consider putting its stewardship of the country ahead of service to the government of the day,” he said. In a letter to MPs, Johnson insisted the suspension would allow him to focus on his domestic priorities of funding the NHS and tackling violent crime, and parliament would have “ample” time to debate Brexit – but it was widely seen as a bid to curtail MPs’ chances to bind his hands. The cross-party rebel alliance agreed to focus on fast-tracking legislation aimed at mandating the prime minister to request an extension to article 50 if he fails to strike a new Brexit deal by mid-October. The fresh scramble to prevent a no-deal Brexit came on a day of extraordinary drama, as: • The leader of the House of Commons, Jacob Rees-Mogg, flew to Balmoral to receive the Queen’s formal approval for the prorogation plan at a meeting of the privy council. • Sterling tumbled by more than 1 cent against the US dollar, as investors interpreted Johnson’s ploy as heightening the risks of a no-deal Brexit, before rallying later in the day to close 0.5 cents down. • Senior EU figures were taken aback, with the European parliament’s Brexit coordinator, Guy Verhofstadt, calling the move, “sinister”. • A petition against the suspension of parliament rapidly exceeded 800,000 signatures. • Jeremy Corbyn protested against the move in a letter to the Queen. • Lawyers for the activist Gina Miller made an urgent application to the high court for a judicial review of the prime minister’s decision. Parliament will now sit for little more than a week from 3 September, before breaking until 14 October, when a new Queen’s speech will be held setting out what Johnson called “a bold and ambitious domestic legislative agenda for the renewal of our country after Brexit”. In practice, given MPs do not sit on most Fridays, they are only likely to lose between four and six sitting days in parliament. MPs would have been due to hold conference recess anyway, from 12 September until 7 October. But Johnson’s gambit squeezes the time available for rebel MPs to act. Their numbers have been boosted by the departure from cabinet of key members of the “Gaukeward squad”, including former chancellor Philip Hammond, who is expected to spearhead next week’s efforts. “At a time of national crisis parliament must be able to meet to hold the government to account and to represent our constituents and it is profoundly undemocratic to shut parliament down to stop it doing its job,” Hammond said. “We are determined parliament will show its resolve to stop a no-deal Brexit … We will have to try to do something when parliament returns next week.” He could table a vote of no-confidence in Johnson’s government; but Labour have repeatedly said they would not do so unless they were convinced of success – which is deemed unlikely while potential Tory rebels are focused on blocking no deal through legislation. Donald Trump waded into the row on Wednesday, fresh from showering praise on Johnson at the G7 summit in Biarritz over the weekend. The US president claimed it would be “very hard” for Corbyn to win a no-confidence vote, because Johnson was “exactly what the UK has been looking for”. Would be very hard for Jeremy Corbyn, the leader of Britain’s Labour Party, to seek a no-confidence vote against New Prime Minister Boris Johnson, especially in light of the fact that Boris is exactly what the U.K. has been looking for, & will prove to be “a great one!” Love U.K. One senior Labour figure speculated that Johnson’s rationale might be to show that he had been forced into a general election. “Buckle up, summer’s over,” he said. But Downing Street insists Johnson is focused on getting a new deal with the EU; and is determined not to go to the polls before Brexit day, even if he loses a vote of no confidence. “We have been very clear that if there’s a no-confidence vote, he won’t resign. We get to set an election date. We don’t want an election, but if we have to set a date, it’s going to be after 31 October,” said a senior government source. The first hint that something was afoot came when the chancellor, Sajid Javid, cancelled a major speech planned for Wednesday, announcing instead that a slimmed-down spending review will take place next week. Johnson’s cabinet, which is packed with veterans of the Vote Leave campaign, were only informed of the prime minister’s decision to suspend parliament in a conference call on Wednesday morning – after Johnson had already made a request to the Queen. It is blindingly obvious that the purpose of prorogation now would be to stop parliament debating Brexit Downing Street insisted this had been the standard approach to planning a Queen’s speech for previous governments. During the conference call, the prime minister stuck resolutely to the line that the suspension was simply aimed at paving the way for his new government to press on with its domestic agenda. No dissent was expressed, the Guardian understands – though one senior Tory source said Amber Rudd was “more reserved” than others. They described the culture secretary, Nicky Morgan, as “enthusiastic as Andrea Leadsom” in supporting the plan. The health secretary, Matt Hancock, faced ridicule on Twitter, with his letter to fellow candidates during the Tory leadership contest calling on them to rule out prorogation being widely shared. Hancock warned in the letter that “a policy on Brexit to prorogue parliament would mean the end of the Conservative party as a serious party of government”. Proroguing Parliament undermines parliamentary democracy and risks a general election. I rule it out and call on all candidates to do the same pic.twitter.com/4aaAK3Tq8M Allies said he had been referring to the more drastic proposal of proroguing parliament through to exit day – and believes narrowing the window in which MPs can debate and vote on an improved Brexit deal could help it to pass, by sharpening the dilemma for MPs. The rebels’ plan for averting a no-deal Brexit leans heavily on Bercow’s assistance. In an extraordinary intervention for the Speaker, whose role demands political neutrality, Bercow said Johnson’s move was a “constitutional outrage”. “However it is dressed up, it is blindingly obvious that the purpose of prorogation now would be to stop parliament debating Brexit and performing its duty in shaping a course for the country,” he said. “I have had no contact from the government, but if the reports that it is seeking to prorogue parliament are confirmed, this move represents a constitutional outrage.” The rebels believe Bercow, who is often accused of trying to thwart Brexit by Eurosceptic MPs, will grant a request for an emergency backbench debate – known as an SO24 – on the the first day parliament returns, 3 September. An amendable motion could then be voted on in a matter of days. If successful it would pass to the Lords who would be required to sit in emergency sessions over the weekend of 7 and 8 September. It must have received royal assent before parliament is prorogued, or the Commons would have to start again from scratch when parliament returns on 14 October. One former Conservative cabinet minister suggested a key rationale for the government’s approach was that, by convention, the Queen’s speech is debated for six days – clogging up the timetable to prevent wrecking manoeuvres. “They have worked through the options and decided this is their only reasonably safe option for delivery on 31 October,” he said. Johnson said MPs would get the opportunity to vote on the outcome of the key 17 October European council meeting, at which he hopes a new Brexit deal will be agreed, during the following week, on 21 and 22 October – little more than a week before exit day. • This article was amended on 29 August 2019. An earlier version suggested that Philip Hammond was among cabinet members who were sacked. In fact he resigned.
PM says ‘backstop just doesn’t work’ in run-up to meetings with Merkel and Macron   Boris Johnson has claimed that EU leaders will change their positions and allow the UK to scrap the Brexit backstop in the withdrawal agreement. As the prime minister prepares for face-to-face talks with Angela Merkel of Germany and Emmanuel Macron of France this week, he acknowledged there would be “bumps in the road” before any agreement to drop the plan to prevent a hard border in Ireland. It follows the leak of cabinet papers this weekend warning that carrying out Johnson’s threat of a no-deal Brexit would cause “incredibly serious” economic harm. “We will be ready to come out on October 31, deal or no deal,” Johnson said during a visit to Truro on Monday. Now of course our friends and partners on the other side of the Channel are showing a little bit of reluctance at the moment to change their position. “That’s fine – I’m confident that they will – but in the meantime we have to get ready for a no-deal outcome. I want a deal. We’re ready to work with our friends and partners to get a deal, but if you want a good deal for the UK, you must simultaneously get ready to come out without one.” Johnson will meet the German chancellor on Wednesday and the French president on Thursday, before the G7 meeting in Biarritz on Saturday. When asked whether progress would be made during these talks, Johnson replied: “Well, that is, I’m afraid, very much up to our friends, and I hope that they will compromise. “They have seen that the UK parliament has three times rejected the withdrawal agreement, the backstop just doesn’t work, it’s not democratic and I hope that they will see fit to compromise, but in the meantime we get ready to come out on 31 October.” A scheduled first meeting with Jean-Claude Juncker, the outgoing European commission president, has been abandoned because Juncker is recovering from surgery to remove his gallbladder. Johnson is also expected to speak to Leo Varadkar, the Irish taoiseach, before the summit. No 10 hopes to hammer home a message that EU leaders will have to negotiate with Johnson, after claims that some leaders still hope parliament could stop a no-deal Brexit and force through a deal. “[The prime minister] has been clear that there cannot be any actual negotiations unless the backstop goes; that’s the message he has delivered to leaders in his phone conversations and he will do that face-to-face,” a Downing Street spokeswoman said. “We have been clear that what the EU needs to understand is that unless the withdrawal agreement can be reopened and the backstop abolished, there isn’t any prospect of a deal.” Asked why the meetings with Merkel and Macron were taking place, the Downing Street spokeswoman said: “The PM believes it’s important to speak to the leaders of France and Germany to deliver the message that he’s been setting out through the phone calls face to face.” Cabinet Office documents from Operation Yellowhammer, reportedly drawn up this month, warned of potential food and fuel shortages, damage to the social care system and a return to a hard border in Northern Ireland if Britain leaves the EU without a deal.
The Brexit storm resurged in August, embroiling the Queen, the courts, and Winston Churchill’s grandson by  Jon Henley Europe correspondent  It was a quiet summer, albeit punctuated by repeated and ominous pledges from Boris Johnson to take Britain out of the EU “do or die”, deal or no deal, on 31 October. Then quite suddenly, Britain’s long-running Brexit drama turned into a crisis. The new prime minister found himself cornered: shorn of a Commons majority, obliged by furious MPs to beg for a Brexit extension he has sworn never to request, and prevented from calling the snap election he urgently wanted. Parliament, meanwhile, was – perhaps unlawfully – suspended until 14 October, preventing MPs from discussing all this until three days before the crunch EU summit at which Brexit’s fate could be decided and a fortnight before the current exit date. How did all this play out, what does it mean and where might it go from here? If you’re blindsided or even just bewildered by the latest unlikely plot twists in the interminable saga of Britain’s efforts to leave the EU, this is for you. The first hint the Brexit beast might have been about to wake from its slumber came in late August, after the new government – made up mostly of hardcore believers, unlike its predecessor – had spent the early summer hammering home its core message and promising that “whatever the circumstances”, Britain would leave the EU on the new Brexit deadline of 31 October. Having decided – narrowly – in June 2016 that Britain should depart the EU, voters had offered no guidance as to the destination: a soft Brexit, remaining close to the EU; a hard Brexit, distancing itself from the bloc; or no deal at all? Theresa May’s government was sure it knew what voters wanted, though, and negotiated with the EU27 the only exit deal possible given a series of red lines she had already laid down. Unfortunately parliament had other ideas, refusing to endorse the deal and forcing the UK to delay its planned departure. After MPs rejected the withdrawal agreement in three successive votes – but proved unable, over many months, to decide on any alternative course of action – May gave up. And in came Johnson, promising to end the impasse. The problem, insisted the new prime minister, was that the Brexit deal contained the infamous Irish backstop, the mechanism to avoid a return to a hard border between Northern Ireland and the Republic of Ireland. It was “undemocratic”, he said, and had to go. The UK would, of course, far prefer to leave with a deal, but it would not hesitate to leave without one – and no amount of Commons votes, or even an election campaign, would change its mind. It was up to “our friends and partners” in the EU to budge. But after spending nearly two painstaking years negotiating the 577 pages of Theresa May’s deal and having always said it could not be reopened, the EU did not believe Johnson wanted a deal. His “central scenario”, European diplomats were told, was to crash out. And that is where things stood – a fraught standoff in an essentially phoney war – on 28 August, when the prime minister suddenly announced he had asked the Queen to suspend parliament for five weeks, from early September to mid-October. And it all, for want of a better term, kicked off. Suspension, or prorogation, is normal in between governments; it usually lasts a couple of weeks. It is not normal for five weeks, little more than 50 days before arguably the most momentous event in the country’s history since the second world war. Unless steps were taken beforehand, on 31 October the UK would, with enormous consequences, crash out of the EU without a deal. Opposition and rebel Tory MPs assumed Johnson wanted to stop parliament stop him doing what he wanted. They were outraged. With a window of barely a week before prorogation kicked in, Labour, the Liberal Democrats, the Scottish National party, Plaid Cymru and the Greens joined forces with 21 doughty Tory objectors, including two former chancellors and Winston Churchill’s grandson. Amid nationwide public protests, Johnson and his cabinet tried to head them off, refusing to rule out simply ignoring any anti no-deal law, and threatening to expel from the Conservative party any rebels who dared vote for one. It didn’t stop them. His opponents declared parliamentary war. Together, they voted to seize control of the parliamentary agenda on the first full day after the summer recess and, then in a series of remarkable votes, rammed through a bill forcing Johnson to ask the EU for another extension – he said he would rather “die in a ditch” – if there was still no agreed Brexit deal by mid-October. Many of the Conservative rebels said their resolve had been strengthened rather than shaken by the prime minister’s bullying. Their subsequent sackings – by text message– enraged moderate Conservatives who lamented what they called the transformation of their previously broad-church party into a narrow, extremist Brexit sect. Within a week of parliament’s return, Johnson had suffered an unprecedented six consecutive parliamentary defeats, including two on motions of his own demanding an early election: perhaps not surprisingly, his rebel purge having left him with a majority of minus 41, he failed to get the required two-thirds of MPs’ votes. Rebel and opposition MPs alike by now had so little trust in Johnson that they refused to allow any fresh elections until they were sure an extension had been secured and a no-deal Brexit on 31 October ruled out. Even his own brother, Jo, quit the cabinet, citing a conflict between “family loyalty and the national interest”. Amid unprecedented scenes in parliament, the prime minister on Monday went ahead with his decision to suspend parliament until 14 October. But there was one more twist: sensationally, Scottish judges declared his move was aimed at silencing parliament and was therefore unlawful. The supreme court will rule next week. Not for the first time in the Brexit saga, that is the £350m-a-week question. Britain is certainly – again not for the first time – an international laughing stock. But where we go from here is still not much clearer than it was before that long, quiet summer. Commentators see four main options. First, Johnson could still get a deal, perhaps by agreeing to the EU’s original proposal to resolve the Ireland problem: creating a border in the Irish sea. Winning parliamentary approval would be very hard, but perhaps possible – Labour MPs in leave-voting constituencies want to deliver, and Tory hardliners may see this as their last chance. Second, he could break his promise, request an extension and then immediately demand an election, counting on a fiercely anti-EU, people-versus-parliament campaign to see him through. This could, however, leave him vulnerable to a squeeze from both the Brexit party and (possibly) a coordinated opposition promising a second referendum. Third, he could go full no deal on 31 October as he promised, ignoring the law (or at least testing it to its limits in the courts). He could then call an early election after the UK leaves the EU, trusting that with Brexit delivered, the Brexit party will be no more – and hoping that no deal is not so catastrophic that the country does not give him a kicking. Finally, he could be pushed out by a no-confidence vote or step down of his own accord. Rather than the divisive Jeremy Corbyn, a more neutral figure (Ken Clarke?) might then head up a temporary government whose sole purpose would be to ask the EU for an extension. Elections would then follow which, if he campaigned for no deal, Johnson could conceivably win. Will the EU27 play ball? They are, certainly, rapidly running out of patience. Most now would really like the UK just to go as soon as possible. They will never throw Ireland under the bus by ditching the backstop - but if no deal could still be avoided, they would be pleased. A good reason (elections, a new government) would be needed, but it is hard to see even Emmanuel Macron refusing a request for an extension intended to avoid no deal. No one wants to be seen to be actively helping the UK over the cliff edge.
A no-deal exit would trigger complex negotiations, argues former top DexEU civil servant   Claiming a no-deal Brexit represents a clean break with the European Union is “nonsensical”, according to Philip Rycroft, the former permanent secretary at the Department for Exiting the EU. Boris Johnson has promised to extricate the UK from the EU on 31 October “come what may” – and has hinted that he could try to get around legislation mandating him to request a Brexit delay. The Brexit party leader, Nigel Farage, whose party trounced the Tories in May’s European elections, has been urging the PM to deliver a “clean break Brexit” by leaving without a deal. But Rycroft, who was the most senior civil servant at DexEU until March this year, told the Guardian a no-deal Brexit would mark the beginning of a complex series of negotiations. “It is not a clean break: what it does is it takes us legally out of the EU. But what it can’t do is undo all of the very close economic ties that we have with the EU, on which so much of our trade as a country depends. And nor would we want to undo all of the close security ties that we have with the EU,” he said. “And because of the importance of those ties both for the EU and the UK, it will remain hugely important to have those expressed through a formal relationship. In other words, we’re going to have to negotiate – and that negotiation on the future relationship starts with citizens, money and the border on the island of Ireland. “So the notion that no deal somehow means that we can turn our backs on the EU and break all our ties is just nonsensical.” Rycroft spent part of his career at the Scottish Office and in the Scottish Executive before working in Nick Clegg’s office during the Tory-Lib Dem coalition government, and helping to coordinate Whitehall’s approach to devolution from the Cabinet Office. He gave a speech on Monday warning that politicians should be thinking carefully about how to protect the union with Scotland and Northern Ireland after Brexit – deal or no deal. “Clearly at the moment, political time has collapsed: everything has become very short term, everyone’s worrying about what’s happening not even next week but tomorrow,” he said. “In those circumstances it’s very different to be lifting their eyes to a more distant horizon. How do we manage as a country, if and when we come out of the EU?” After this week’s renewed clashes between Johnson’s government and rebel MPs and the judiciary, Rycroft said it may be time to think about whether Britain’s constitution is working – a question also raised by the Speaker, John Bercow, on Thursday. “We don’t have a written constitution: it relies on convention and precedent, and the spirit within which those conventions and precedents are regarded. And if those conventions and precedents are ignored, overturned, challenged – then the lack of a codified constitution becomes an issue,” he said. “I would agree with those who would say in these circumstances, it may not be that you’d need a written constitution as a whole, but as a minimum, some of the procedures, not least in the Houses of Parliament, are going to have to be codified for clarity on what the rules are. There is no doubt in my mind that we have reached that point.” Rycroft is about to take up a post at the University of Cambridge as a distinguished honorary researcher at the Bennett Institute for Public Policy and the department for politics and internal studies. He warned against the growing tendency in public debate to denigrate civil servants and blame them for the failings of their political masters. “Civil servants do their job for governments of the day, delivering the policies of the government of the day, and that’s just as true for Brexit as for anything else.” He said claims his erstwhile colleague Olly Robbins had sought to stymie the government’s negotiating efforts were “complete nonsense”. Robbins left Whitehall as Johnson took over and it emerged recently that he had taken a job at the investment bank Goldman Sachs.
Boris Johnson agrees pact with Northern Irish party as details emerge of ‘two borders’ plan   Boris Johnson has struck a secret deal with the Democratic Unionist party involving radical proposals for a Belfast-Dublin “bilateral lock” on post-Brexit arrangements on the island of Ireland. Details have emerged of the prime minister’s final Brexit offer that he will lay out on Wednesday, with Northern Ireland staying under EU single market regulations for agri-food and manufactured goods until at least 2025, at which point its assembly in Stormont will decide whether to continue alignment with EU or UK standards. Johnson set up a high-stakes fortnight of talks with a threat that he will press ahead with a no-deal exit if the EU27 fails to engage with his plans. No 10 is hoping the proposals will be enough to entice the EU back into negotiations ahead of the crunch EU summit on 17 October, with Johnson telling a reception at the Conservative party conference on Tuesday that the next 48 hours would be crucial. The proposal that Ireland would have “two borders for four years” once the transition period ends after 2020 is likely to receive a frosty welcome in EU capitals. The broadcaster RTÉ quoted an Irish government source saying Johnson’s deal, as reported on Tuesday evening, would not be acceptable to Dublin. However, DUP sources have confirmed that the party is largely “content” with the proposals, which are believed to still include a lot of elements of the backstop – a major concession for the party. The British government’s version of Brexit involves the UK ultimately leaving the single market and customs union, requiring the return of a range of checks on goods crossing the border between Northern Ireland and the Republic of Ireland. The “backstop” is intended as a standstill placeholder to ensure such checks do not have to be imposed between Brexit happening with a deal, and the start of a new free trade agreement yet to be negotiated between the UK and the EU. Theresa May's withdrawal agreement proposed keeping the whole of the UK in a shared customs territory with the EU during this period. An alternative idea involves only Northern Ireland staying in the EU’s customs territory. That would place a customs border in the Irish Sea. May described it as a threat to the constitutional integrity of the UK, but the new prime minister, Boris Johnson, has opened the current talks by proposing an all-Ireland agri-food zone. The suggestion is that he will seek to quietly build on that with further NI-only arrangements. Given an NI-only backstop was an EU proposal in the first place, the U-turn would be warmly welcomed in Brussels, although attempts to give the Northern Ireland assembly a veto on its continuation would not be acceptable, and the DUP would be unlikely to support the prime minister in such a move in parliament. If there is a no-deal Brexit, then there is no backstop. Daniel Boffey One central element of the proposals is expected to be a “Stormont lock,” giving local parties a say on any future proposals to keep the region aligned to EU rules and maintain an invisible border with the Republic of Ireland if Britain decided to diverge from European standards on goods and food. Also crucial is the reestablishment of a newly empowered British-Irish ministerial council which was set up under the Belfast/Good Friday agreement but has not sat for three years. The restored council would give representatives from Stormont and the Irish parliament oversight on the future regulatory regime on the island of Ireland. In his speech to the Conservative party conference in Manchester on Wednesday, the embattled prime minister will outline what he will call a “fair and reasonable compromise”, which Downing Street says has been drawn up after 70 hours of discussions with other EU member states. He will insist that if the EU27 fails to engage with his proposals, he will press ahead with a no-deal Brexit at the end of October. Brussels has warned there will be a cold reception if the offer resembles draft proposals leaked on Monday, which would involve customs clearance sites five to 10 miles from the Irish border – later denied by Johnson. One EU source said: “Perhaps they realise if it’s anything that looks like what was floated in this leak, it is going to go down like a bucket of sick.” No 10 briefed EU capitals on Tuesday on its controversial proposals and the plans are due to be published in full on Wednesday Northern Ireland would not stay in the EU’s customs territory, as Johnson explained on Tuesday in a round of media interviews, meaning there would be two borders for four years. Johnson told the BBC: “If the EU is going to insist on customs checks as we come out as it is, then we will have to accept that reality. And there will have to be a system, for customs checks away from the border. Now, we think those checks can be absolutely minimal and non-intrusive and won’t involve new infrastructure.” The move by the UK to align with full EU regulations on goods for a period of four years has been privately welcomed by the EU member states. The four-year time limit will dismay the Irish government, however. The taoiseach, Leo Varadkar, has repeatedly said such a time limit would be no better for Ireland than a no-deal today, given the uncertainty that would be created for the north-south economy. The UK’s insistence that Northern Ireland will not stay in the EU’s customs territory, and that extra customs checks and controls would be required on the island of Ireland, is another major red line crossed for Dublin. One source said the British-Irish council would be a “big part of moving along” the part of the backstop that was unattractive to the DUP – a regulatory barrier down the Irish Sea. It also would be a “double lock” on any move by Northern Ireland to diverge from EU rules applying in the republic. “We need a mechanism so that the future relationship is not just left to London and Brussels,” said one insider. “A north-south ministerial council allows us to work things out between us.” The proposals “deal with a lot of the issues the backstop was designed to deal with,” said a source close to the secret talks. “Everyone wants a deal. The DUP wants a deal, Dublin wants a deal, we want a deal. We are hopeful. It doesn’t mean we have the cake, but we are hoping we have the ingredients for one.” However, the proposals risk a legal challenge as the Withdrawal Act 2019, also known as the Benn Act, bars any new infrastructure including customs checks on the border that did not exist before Brexit. Johnson will tell the conference that even remainers now want to “move on” – a finding from recent focus groups. “Voters are desperate for us to focus on their other priorities,” he will say. Cabinet ministers are bullish about the prospects of securing a deal before the 17 October European council – but sketchy about the details. One told the Guardian they feared any bid to circumvent the Benn Act forbidding him leaving on Halloween without a deal would ultimately result in the supreme court forcing Johnson’s hand, but that by determinedly dubbing it the “surrender bill”, he had driven home the message that any delay would not be his fault. However, Johnson will insist again on Wednesday that he will not budge from the Halloween deadline. “Let’s get Brexit done on 31 October so in 2020 our country can move on,” he will say. The government has also opened up communications channels to Labour MPs in recent days in the hope that some who fear the consequences of a second referendum could yet support a Brexit agreement. At a DUP reception, the party’s leader, Arlene Foster, put on a show of unity with Johnson whose speech was greeted with chants of “Boris, Boris” and “no surrender”. She said the return of devolution to Northern Ireland was “critically important” and added: “I know a lot of people out there who want to get on with their lives, who are sick, sore and tired of listening to Brexit. They want to get Brexit done … we want to see an agreement reached.” After his speech, Johnson said: “I’m not going to pretend this is going to be easy. This is not a walk in the park but we have made huge progress and I hope very much that in the course of the next two days we are going to get there.” He said that after getting Brexit done, he wanted to put Jeremy Corbyn into a “figurative rocket” and “put him into orbit where he belongs”, with one audience member heckling with a violent suggestion that the Labour leader should face a “noose”. As well as outlining his plans for a Brexit deal, Johnson will draw up battle lines for the general election – including seeking to bracket Labour with the Scottish National party, a move the Tories used successfully against Ed Miliband’s Labour party in 2015. Johnson has also been keen to change the subject to domestic policy. There were some suggestions in Manchester that he could unveil a headline-grabbing tax cut on Wednesday to distract attention from the details of the backstop plan.
‘Brussels’, Britain and Barnier have often been misrepresented – not least by our prime minister. Now the truth is coming out  It was characteristically shrewd of the European Union’s chief negotiator, Michel Barnier, to place an assessment of the real state of play in last weekend’s Sunday Telegraph. It was in the Sunday Telegraph over the years that Boris Johnson, when he was based in Brussels, devoted his so-called reporting to consistently misleading stories about what our membership of the EU was really about. Persistently negative, Johnson revelled in distorting reality. He was so lazy that he often had to ask the Guardian’s John Palmer what was really going on – before then distorting it. In the past week the true nature of this charlatan has been available for all to witness on television as he has squirmed his way through a series of welcome parliamentary defeats, brought upon himself, with the aid of his chief “strategist”, one Dominic Cummings. Among other things in last weekend’s article, Barnier pointed out that the arrangement by which the border between Ireland and Northern Ireland would remain open, via the continuation of a UK-wide customs union – the so-called backstop – was negotiated at the UK’s request (my italics). It is this that our egregious prime minister has been trying to dispense with, in a way that would risk a return of the Troubles and undoing the patiently negotiated Good Friday agreement. Of course, alas, distortions in the British media’s reporting of anything to do with “Brussels” are not confined to the Telegraph. This is the weekend of the Ambrosetti forum, at the Villa d’Este, Lake Como. Here, two years ago, I witnessed a speech by Barnier that was thoroughly reasonable but widely misreported in the British media – including, I regret to say, by the BBC. When I returned to London I could hardly believe the way Barnier had been reported. The theme was that the rest of the EU were out to punish us. What he actually said was that there would be consequences, for us and them, if we went ahead with Brexit. By the way, I have no idea what the outcome of this farce is going to be, but I do know that many of us Remainers regret that over the years we ourselves were not more positive about the advantages of belonging to a powerful customs union, with more than 70 trade agreements, and a single market that has brought many good things to our daily lives, to say nothing of all the environmental and safety benefits, as well as freedom of movement – often confused with the separate issue of immigration. When the deluded army of Brexiters goes on about the British people having spoken, I start counting the spoons The reason why there is so much sudden interest in warding off the no-deal, “let’s get on with it” scenario is that any form of Brexit would be bad news – but no deal would be the worst of the lot. As Barnier says: “The EU cannot prevent the UK from choosing a no-deal scenario. I would fail to understand the logic of that choice, though, as we would still need to solve the same problems after 31 October” – or later, as may now be the case. As Sir Ivan Rogers, our former ambassador to the EU, recently pointed out, courtesy of that den of Brexiters, the Spectator: “The central problem with no deal is that it is being heavily (mis)sold as providing certainty, finality – a ‘clean break’ – when it would manifestly do nothing of the sort.” The short-term shock would be bad enough – well outlined in No Deal Brexit, a publication from the thinktank The UK in a Changing Europe. But as Rogers writes: “The reality of no deal is that it would leave all the most intractable issues about our future relationship with the EU unresolved … It would, in other words, be just the start, not the end.” We have reached the stage where, at a time when economic indicators suggest that the British economy may already be in recession, it is reported as good news that the Bank of England governor, Mark Carney, now says that the short-term impact of no deal would be “only” a fall of 5.5% in gross domestic product, not the Bank’s original 8%, on account of the precautionary measures already taken. Such a fall would far outweigh the deleterious impact of the 1979-82 and 1990-92 recessions, which went down in history as the worst since the Great Depression of the interwar years. Enough said? Now, when the deluded army of Brexiters goes on about the British people having spoken, I start counting the spoons. Let the British people speak again, on a basis of much more information. As House of Commons briefing paper 07212 sets out in respect of the 2016 referendum: it was “consultative”. It continues: “The UK does not have constitutional provisions which would require the results of a referendum to be implemented.”
Labour claims that PM is aiming to invoke emergency powers using the Civil Contingencies Act   Boris Johnson is whipping up fears of rioting and deaths on the streets if Brexit is not delivered by 31 October so that he can try to invoke emergency powers and avoid extending the UK’s EU membership beyond that date, Labour’s Brexit spokesman, Keir Starmer, claimed on Saturday. After a week in which the prime minister was accused by MPs from all the main parties, including senior Tories, of inciting violence by accusing Remainers of Brexit “surrender” and “betrayal”, Starmer said it was part of an orchestrated plan to stoke a sense of outrage among Leave voters and create civil unrest, so an extension might be avoided. Increasingly MPs across the House of Commons believe Downing Street is considering using the Civil Contingencies Act 2004, which grants special powers in the event of a national emergency, as a way to override the so-called Benn act, which mandates the prime minister to seek a delay to Brexit if no deal has been struck with Brussels by 19 October. Johnson’s description of the act as the “surrender act” provoked heated exchanges in parliament last Wednesday. Female MPs invoked the memory of their murdered colleague Jo Cox and said they feared for their safety. on Saturday night the prime minister reinforced his rhetoric in a newspaper interview saying his “humdrum political metaphor” could just as well have been the “abject capitulation act”, and questioned whether the EU had been consulted during the bill’s drafting. Starmer told the Observer that Downing Street’s strategy was clearly to stoke tensions but he warned Johnson that any attempt to invoke the Civil Contingencies Act would be defeated in the courts. “Whipping up the idea of riots or even deaths if we do not leave the EU on 31 October is the height of irresponsibility,” Starmer said. “But it is also pretty obviously being orchestrated. If this is part of a government plan to misuse powers under emergency legislation, I can assure the prime minister we will defeat him in court and in parliament.” Johnson is expected to continue his attacks on Remainers this week at the Tory conference in Manchester where the slogan will be “Get Brexit Done”. Former Tory MP and attorney general Dominic Grieve said he could see no other possible way Downing Street could comply with the law and deliver Brexit on time. “The Civil Contingencies Act is the only possible route I can imagine they can be thinking of,” Grieve said. “But if they do try to do this it would be a constitutional outrage. And if it passed through parliament it would be immediately challenged in the courts.” Allies of Johnson have warned in recent days that the UK will face civil disorder on the scale of the gilets jaunes protests in France if Brexit were to be delayed or reversed. Senior Labour sources said that possible use of the Civil Contingencies Act to trump the Benn act was on a list of options that the party’s legal advisers believe Downing Street might use. After 11 supreme court judges ruled unanimously last week that Johnson’s decision to shut parliament for five weeks had been unlawful, and declared the prorogation null and void, MPs say there are signs of increasing desperation at No 10 as it faces the prospects of more defeats in parliament and the courts. On Saturday night, Johnson signalled that he would again challenge the judiciary by introducing US-style political screening of supreme court judges before they are appointed. Speaking to the Sunday Telegraph, the prime minister said: “If judges are to pronounce on political questions in this way, then there is at least an argument that there should be some form of accountability. The lessons of America are relevant.” The Law Society and the Bar Council both said last week that politically appointed judges would threaten the independence of the judiciary. Some minor parties are pressing hard to pass a motion censuring Johnson, forcing him to apologise for the language he has used against his Brexit opponents. Plaid Cymru’s Liz Saville-Roberts has even asked Speaker John Bercow whether she can table a motion to impeach Johnson. Another avenue being examined is to censure Johnson should he appear before the liaison committee of MPs. Last week the former Tory prime minister John Major said he feared the Johnson government would try to bypass the Benn Act through an order of council. “It is important to note that an order of council can be passed by privy councillors – that is government ministers – without involving HM the Queen,” he said, adding: “I should warn the prime minister that – if this route is taken – it will be in flagrant defiance of parliament and utterly disrespectful to the supreme court. It would be a piece of political chicanery that no one should ever forgive or forget.” The Civil Contingencies Act provides the government with powers to create emergency regulations at times of national crisis and threats to safety (including wartime), emergencies that threaten “serious damage to human welfare”, or to the environment or the security of the UK. Damage to human welfare is defined in the act to include disruption to transport networks or to the supply of food, money, energy, or health services. Downing St sources said it was not planning to use the Civil Contingencies Act. A spokesman added: “The prime minister is determined to deliver Brexit on time and he will abide by the law.” Senior Labour sources played down suggestions by the Scottish National Party that the opposition parties could this week table a vote no confidence in Boris Johnson’s government, with a view to installing a caretaker administration led by Jeremy Corbyn who would then apply for an extension to Brexit and call an election. While Labour is not publicly ruling out the move, shadow cabinet members privately say they will only move once an extension to Brexit has been guaranteed. The Liberal Democrats and other opposition parties, as well as former Tory MPs and independents, say they will not under any circumstances agree to install Corbyn in Downing Street, even temporarily. Anna Soubry, leader of the Independent Group for Change, which has five MPs, said: “We need to keep the prime minister held firmly accountable for the mess he has created. We do not want any votes of no confidence until that extension is up and running and even then I will only support a vote of no confidence knowing that it will result in a government of national unity resulting in a people’s vote confirmatory referendum. “Anything else gives Johnson his escape route. His only plan B is a general election and a general election would not solve Brexit. Only a referendum will sort out Brexit.” On Saturday the Liberal Democrats announced that Dr Phillip Lee, who recently defected from the Tories, will be their candidate to fight the veteran Tory and hard-line Brexiter John Redwood in Wokingham, to set up a Leave v Remain contest in the Berkshire seat. 
Away from the drama in London, what's actually  going on? In Wigan, Bury, Manchester, Nuneaton and Macclesfield, John Harris and John Domokos find confusion and weariness about Brexit and fury at the so-called coup - as well as homelessness, hunger and the deep roots of the UK's current meltdown in what Anywhere but Westminster began chronicling 10 long years ago     
Anti-Brexit rallies mark start of academic year with young people demanding to be heard   Unprecedented levels of student activism are set to erupt this month when angry students, fed up with the turmoil around Brexit, arrive for freshers’ week, student unions say. This term sees the arrival at university of three whole years’ worth of students – first, second and third years – who were too young to vote in the European referendum in 2016. Latest polling suggests students would be more likely to vote in an election now than at any time in the past 15 years. Anti-Brexit rallies and debates are scheduled at universities across the UK in the next month, and started yesterday with a protest demanding a people’s vote at Edinburgh University, one of the first to return after the summer. Andrew Wilson, president of Edinburgh’s student union and an organiser of the rally, says: “There is a growing anger among young people that they haven’t had a say on Brexit. While MPs argue in Westminster it’s us who will lose. This is our future.” Even before students arrive on campus, student unions are contacting them on social media about registering to vote, and they say they will step up their campaigns during freshers’ week and beyond. Most campaigns have the firm backing of vice-chancellors, who fear losing European staff, students and research cash after Brexit. Moreover, unlike in the past two general elections, universities now have an explicit legal obligation to encourage students to sign up to vote, as a condition of being accredited by the Office for Students. Molli Cleaver, president of Reading University’s student union says: “Before the summer a lot of students were fed up with Brexit going on so long. That is changing to anger. Students want to be heard.” The Conservatives lost Reading East to Labour in 2017 for the first time in 12 years – proof, Reading’s students’ union says, that they can make a difference by voting. “We were definitely a contributing factor,” she says. “We are focusing on getting across the message that although you might feel powerless, collectively you have power to change things,” she says. Richard Brooks, a co-founder of For Our Future’s Sake, a national student campaign for a people’s vote on Brexit, says it is struggling to keep on top of all the activist events scheduled in UK universities and colleges. “In 2016 it felt like Brexit happened to young people and we should have been more engaged. But polling is showing that young people who didn’t get to vote are one of the most exercised groups in terms of Brexit. This generation has had enough of the political chaos.” Students are often caricatured as apathetic. But research last month by the pollsters YouthSight, which has tracked the student vote since 2004, found around 80% would now be likely to vote, compared with an average of 64% since 2005. The poll also found that although Labour was still the clear favourite, its popularity had halved since last year. Around 38% of students said they would vote Labour, down from a record high of more than 70% in February 2018; 19% said they would vote Lib Dem; 18% would back the Greens; and the Conservatives were on a record low of 12%. Nick Hillman, director of the Higher Education Policy Institute thinktank, says: “In some seats where there are a large number of students in one constituency, and where they vote differently from the local population, their vote does really matter.” He cites Cambridge, where he stood unsuccessfully as a Conservative candidate in 2010, as a classic case. The university city was a Tory stronghold for decades and the Tory vote only started falling in the mid-1970s, when students were first allowed to vote at their term-time address. It has fallen in almost every election since. Stephen Fisher, associate professor in political sociology at Oxford University and an expert on elections, says historically students have swung to whichever party was being most generous on student funding – but that might be about to change. “There is a big question about whether fees will still be the big political issue for students. Given the current politics, it is more likely to be Brexit.” Colin Riordan, vice-chancellor of Cardiff University, in the elite Russell group, says there has been a marked shift on campuses away from “tribal” allegiances to political parties and towards issue-based politics. “They tend to be much more committed to causes like climate change and the major ills of society. And I think they do care about democracy and about Brexit,” he says. Students flexed their political muscles during the 2017 general election, when high student turnout helped shape the outcome in a number of seats. At Kent University, students queued around the block to vote and helped unseat an MP in a constituency that had been Tory since the first world war. Kent, which markets itself as the UK’s European university and has campuses in Paris, Brussels, Rome and Athens, is expecting student temperatures to be high when they return next week. Prof Jeremy Carrette, the university’s dean for Europe, who has been working closely with the student union on student voter engagement, says: “Brexit has always been a huge issue for us. We look out on the white cliffs and see Europe. But it’s clear we will be entering a much more emotionally intense time when our students come back.” Prof David Green, vice-chancellor of Worcester University, will be leading a “democracy day” at his university at the end of September to encourage students to debate what has been happening in Westminster. Smita Jamdar, head of education at the law firm Shakespeare Martineau, says legally all universities should be doing more to sign their students up to vote – and that probably also means making sure they get to the polling station on the day. “Democracy needs nurturing,” she says. “We need to encourage young students to get involved.” 
Cabinet secretary urged to look into conflict of interest fears raised by Philip Hammond and Rachel Johnson   The UK’s most senior civil servant is under pressure to investigate Boris Johnson’s financial backers following cross-party claims that unnamed individuals stand to benefit from the prime minister’s willingness to pursue a no-deal Brexit. John McDonnell, the shadow chancellor, has written to the cabinet secretary, Sir Mark Sedwill, asking if there may be a conflict of interest in Johnson’s acceptance of support from hedge funds that could gain from an economic shock. Earlier on Saturday, Philip Hammond, the former chancellor, suggested Johnson was pursuing the interests of financial backers set to gain from a no-deal Brexit, in a major escalation of tensions in the prime minister’s own party. Hammond said he was repeating a comment made last week by Rachel Johnson, the prime minister’s sister. The former chancellor was accused by senior Tories of attempting a “smear” without evidence. However, Hammond was supported on Saturday by a series of MPs from across the Commons.  “Johnson is backed by speculators who have bet billions on a hard Brexit – and there is only one option that works for them: a crash-out no-deal that sends the currency tumbling and inflation soaring,” Hammond wrote in the Times. Downing Street has refused to comment on the claim. Guto Bebb, a former Tory minister who was thrown out of the party for opposing a no-deal Brexit, said: “The dubious financiers who supported the ‘leave’ campaign and the prime minister’s leadership campaign are betting against Britain. The PM should put the interests of the country first rather than facilitating a financial bonanza for a few.” Anna Soubry, the leader of Change UK, said: “This week’s events are damning evidence that Boris Johnson has no moral compass. It gives me no pleasure to believe that Johnson is in hock to all manner of people and in particular those who don’t give a toss about the livelihoods of our constituents but simply get even more rich gambling on our children’s future.” However, the business minister Nadhim Zahawi said Hammond was peddling a conspiracy. “Philip you let yourself down by claiming speculators on ‘no deal’ are interfering in us leaving the EU,” he tweeted. “This is an ugly smear that is completely untrue. If you know anything about finance or the City then you will know that.” Hammond and his team have not named any individual donors. However, hedge fund managers have backed Johnson. One of those is Crispin Odey, a fund manager who has also previously backed Vote Leave and Ukip. Over the summer, it was reported that his fund had made a £300m bet against British businesses and stood to profit from an economic slump in the UK. However, the fund also backed other British companies. Odey did not respond to a request for comment. McDonnell said: “Given widespread concerns raised by the former chancellor Philip Hammond’s comment today about Johnson’s speculator sponsors profiteering from a no-deal Brexit, I am writing to Mark Sedwill, the cabinet secretary, to seek a Cabinet Office investigation into this potential conflict of interest.” The conflict of interest code for members of the House of Commons states: “Given that service in parliament is a public trust … members are expected … to fulfil their public duties with honesty and uphold the highest standards so as to avoid real or apparent conflicts of interests, and maintain and enhance public confidence and trust in the integrity of each member and in the House of Commons.”
PM says UK can still leave with no deal and fails to deny asking EU nations to block extension   Boris Johnson has ramped up speculation that he is planning to bypass a law that stops the UK from crashing out of the EU without a deal. The prime minister told the BBC’s The Andrew Marr Show that Britain can still leave the bloc on 31 October despite the passing of the Benn Act, which aims to prevent a no-deal Brexit by forcing him to ask Brussels for a delay. He also failed to deny holding talks with EU heads of state to request they block any request for a Brexit extension. Despite outrage this week after he repeatedly labelled the Benn Act the “surrender bill”, Johnson described himself as a “model of restraint” in what has been described as an increasingly toxic political atmosphere. During the interview on The Andrew Marr Show on the first day of the Conservative party conference in Manchester, Johnson also refused to apologise for using the word “humbug” in response to the MP Paula Sherriff’s complaint that she has received death threats, claiming he had been discussing a different point. On whether he had declared an interest when public money was given to the company run by his close friend Jennifer Arcuri when he was mayor of London, he said he had acted with “propriety”. At 11pm UK time on 31 October the UK would, by default, become a “third country” in terms of relations with the EU, with no overarching post-Brexit plan in place and no transition period. The UK would no longer be paying into the EU budget, nor would it hand over the £39bn divorce payment. The UK would drop out of countless arrangements, pacts and treaties, covering everything from tariffs to the movement of people, foodstuffs, other goods and data, to numerous specific deals on things such as aviation, and policing and security. Without an overall withdrawal agreement each element would need to be agreed. In the immediate aftermath, without a deal the UK would trade with the EU on the default terms of the World Trade Organization (WTO), including tariffs on agricultural goods. The UK government has already indicated that it will set low or no tariffs on goods coming into the country. This would lower the price of imports – making it harder for British manufacturers to compete with foreign goods. If the UK sets the tariffs to zero on goods coming in from the EU, under WTO “most favoured nation” rules it must also offer the same zero tariffs to other countries. WTO rules only cover goods – they do not apply to financial services, a significant part of the UK’s economy. Trading under WTO rules will also require border checks, which could cause delays at ports, and a severe challenge to the peace process in Ireland without alternative arrangements in place to avoid a hard border. Some no-deal supporters have claimed that the UK can use article 24 of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (Gatt) to force the EU to accept a period of up to 10 years where there are no tariffs while a free trade agreement is negotiated. However, the UK cannot invoke article 24 unilaterally – the EU would have to agree to it. In previous cases where the article has been used, the two sides had a deal in place, and it has never been used to replicate something of the scale and complexity of the EU and the UK’s trading relationship. The director general of the WTO, Roberto Azevêdo, has told Prospect magazine that “in simple factual terms in this scenario, you could expect to see the application of tariffs between the UK and EU where currently there are none”. Until some agreements are in place, a no-deal scenario will place extra overheads on UK businesses – eg the current government advice is that all drivers, including lorries and commercial vehicles, will require extra documentation to be able to drive in Europe after 31 October if there is no deal. Those arguing for a “managed” no deal envisage that a range of smaller, sector-by-sector, bilateral agreements could be quickly put into place as mutual self-interest between the UK and EU to avoid introducing or to rapidly remove this kind of bureaucracy. Martin Belam In a bullish performance, Johnson said repeatedly that the public are weary of Brexit and just want to get it done – the slogan of this year’s autumn conference. He said there was still a chance of reaching a deal with the EU but that efforts were not helped by the Benn Act, which compels him to ask for a Brexit extension if he has not struck a deal by 19 October. He said: “Obviously the chances of a deal or no deal depend very much on the common sense of our friends and partners. It has not been helped by the surrender act. “I do think there’s a good chance [of getting a deal] and we’re working incredibly hard. I’ve been having conversations ... we will continue to work tomorrow and in the course of the next few days … to see if we can get this thing over the line. And there’s a good chance.” Asked if it was still possible to leave on 31 October without a deal, he replied: “Of course we can.” Asked about suggestions that the government could use EU law to supersede the Benn Act or use contingency powers, he said it was a hypothetical scenario that he would not discuss. Asked directly if he had spoken to any other EU heads of state and requested they veto an extension, including the rightwing Hungarian prime minister, Viktor Orbán, he said: “I am certainly not now going into the discussions I’m having with other EU heads of state about the negotiations because they are interesting, but they are also delicate.” However, he said it was clear that “other EU countries do not want this thing to keep dragging on”. Despite depicting himself as the man who can deliver Brexit, he ruled out quitting should he be forced into a delay. “No … I’ve undertaken to lead my party and the country at a difficult time … and I’m going to continue to do that. I believe it’s my responsibility to do that.” He said he could not discuss whether he had apologised to the Queen after the supreme court found the prorogation of parliament had been unlawful. After a week in which he was criticised for his use of language around Brexit and his perceived dismissiveness of MPs’ complaints, Johnson remained unapologetic. He said there was a “cloud of indignation” around phrases such as “surrender bill”, which he claimed was masking the legislation’s true aim – to keep the UK tied to the EU indefinitely. “Military metaphors are old, standard, parliamentary terms,” he said, adding that they had been used for centuries and should continue to be used. “If you cannot use a metaphor like surrender, to describe the surrender act … you are diminishing parliamentary debate,” he said. He said the abuse female had MPs had received was deplorable and that everyone should act more calmly in politics. Asked if that included him, he replied: “I think I’ve been the model of restraint.” He was not asked during the interview about a report on Sunday that he inappropriately squeezed the thigh of the Sunday Times journalist Charlotte Edwardes during a private lunch almost 20 years ago when she was a contributor to the Spectator, which he edited. Edwardes said another woman at the same lunch said he had done the same to her. He faced a number of questions about his relationship with Acruri, an entrepreneur he is said to have had a close friendship with and who received public money for her business when Johnson was mayor of London. She also attended official trade trips. The prime minister has been referred to the Independent Office for Police Conduct, which investigates complaints of misconduct connected to police in England and Wales. As mayor, Johnson was also head of the mayor’s office for policing and crime. He insisted there was “no interest to declare” amid claims about his association with the former American model turned tech businesswoman. Asked by Marr if he declared an interest relating to his links with Arcuri when he was mayor, Johnson replied: “Everything was done in accordance with the code ... and everything was done with full propriety.”
With 34 days until the latest deadline, might we still see a no deal despite the efforts of MPs?   With little more than a month until the UK’s third scheduled departure date from the EU, the path ahead remains deeply uncertain. So what might happen in the coming 34 days – and might we see a no-deal Brexit happen anyway, despite the efforts of parliament? While the date for Brexit is still 31 October, this will only happen if Boris Johnson is able to agree a new departure deal with the EU, which is then approved by parliament. Under the so-called Benn Act – the backbench-originated measure pushed through parliament just before the Commons was suspended – if by the end of the European council summit on 17 and 18 October a deal has not been reached, Johnson is obliged to seek a new Brexit extension until at least 31 January. While it is possible the potential chaos of no deal will produce last-minute compromises on both sides, the signs do not look good. In particular, a deal would almost certainly require the support in parliament of ex-Tories stripped of the party whip and some Labour rebels; after the toxic atmosphere in the Commons this week, this appears unlikely. The prime minister has repeatedly said he will comply with the law, but also that he will not seek an extension. The contradiction has prompted speculation over other means Johnson could take to get round the obligation. Raised as a possibility by Sir John Major in a speech on Thursday evening, this scenario would involve an edict being passed by government ministers without the involvement of the Queen, via an arcane procedure. However, a series of legal experts have said this seems impossible, not least because it would contravene the bill of rights, which dictates the principle of parliamentary sovereignty. Eirik Bjorge, a professor of public and international law at Bristol University, told the Guardian the idea was a “non-starter”. This 2004 act, introduced under Labour, allows a government at a time of national crisis to declare an emergency and, for a limited period, exercise sweeping executive powers. Some have speculated whether Johnson could use this to ignore the Benn Act, or to call an election, thus dissolving parliament. However, this also seems a legal stretch, given the fairly strict definitions of what constitutes an emergency and the fact it could be challenged by parliament. Mark Elliott, a professor of public law at Cambridge, tweeted that it was “very difficult to see” how the conditions for an emergency could be met. Another mooted plan is that Johnson could, as dictated by the Benn Act, write to the EU seeking an extension, but also attach a second letter or note, explaining that the government did not want the new deadline, thus scuppering it. However, senior lawyers have said that such an action would very likely be seen as breaching the intent of the law, and thus expose Johnson to potential legal repercussions. The prime minister could step down rather than agreeing the extension, thus styling himself as something of a Brexit martyr for an upcoming election. The downside for him would be that the public might then lose any wariness of Jeremy Corbyn in Downing Street if they see him doing the job. Opposition parties could seek to oust Johnson via a no-confidence motion, but have said they first want to see a no deal on 31 October completely ruled out. Even if Johnson succeeded in crashing out of the EU at the end of next month, a newly elected administration might still manage to repair the broken relationship, one prominent lawyer has suggested. Prof Mads Andenas QC, a former director of the British Institute of International and Comparative Law, said: “If the date is passed by tricks and cheating, and a new PM installed, there is nothing barring the two sides to the exit, in the following week, giving a new extension. When parties to a treaty agree, they most certainly can do this ... In that situation a new government could also choose to withdraw the article 50 application altogether,” adding: “The ECJ is not likely to entertain any challenge.” 
